


Containing the same individual Time
with the former. 



Shewing what is to be deemed Plagiarism in a
modern Author, and what is to be considered
as lawful Prize. 
The learned Reader must have observed,
that in the Course of this
mighty Work, I have often translated
Passages out of the best antient Authors,
without quoting the Original, or without 

taking the least Notice of the Book from
whence they were borrowed. 
This Conduct in Writing is placed in a
very proper Light by the ingenious Abbé 
Bannier, in his Preface to his Mythology,
a Work of great Erudition, and of equal
Judgment. “It will be easy,” says he,
“for the Reader to observe, that I have
frequently had greater Regard to him,
than to my own Reputation: For an
Author certainly pays him a considerable
Compliment, when, for his Sake, he
suppresses learned Quotations that come
in his Way, and which would have cost
him but the bare Trouble of translating.” 
To fill up a Work with these Scraps may
indeed be considered as a downright Cheat
on the learned World, who are by such
Means imposed upon to buy a second Time
in Fragments and by Retail what they have
already in Gross, if not in their Memories,
upon their Shelves; and it is still more cruel
upon the Illiterate, who are drawn in to pay
for what is of no manner of Use to them. 
A Writer who intermixes great Quantity of
Greek and Latin with his Works, deals by
the Ladies and fine Gentlemen in the same 

paultry Manner with which they are treated
by the Auctioneers, who often endeavour so
to confound and mix up their Lots, that, in
order to purchase the Commodity you want,
you are obliged at the same Time to purchase
that which will do you no Service. 
And yet as there is no Conduct so fair
and disinterested, but that it may be misunderstood
by Ignorance, and misrepresented
by Malice, I have been sometimes
tempted to preserve my own Reputation,
at the Expence of my Reader, and
to transcribe the Original, or at least to
quote Chapter and Verse, whenever I have
made Use either of the Thought or Expression
of another. I am indeed in some
Doubt that I have often suffered by the
contrary Method; and that by suppressing
the original Author's Name, I have been
rather suspected of Plagiarism, than reputed to
act from the amiable Motive above-assigned
by that justly celebrated Frenchman. 
Now to obviate all such Imputations for
the future, I do here confess and justify the
Fact. The Antients may be considered
as a rich Common, where every Person
who hath the smallest Tenement in Parnassus
hath a free Right to fatten his Muse. Or, 

to place it in a clearer Light, we Moderns
are to the Antients what the Poor are to the
Rich. By the Poor here I mean, that
large and venerable Body which, in English,
we call The Mob. Now, whoever hath had
the Honour to be admitted to any Degree
of Intimacy with this Mob, must well know
that it is one of their established Maxims,
to plunder and pillage their rich Neighbours
without any Reluctance; and that this is
held to be neither Sin nor Crime  among
them. And so constantly do they abide
and act by this Maxim, that in every Parish
almost in the Kingdom, there is a Kind of
Confederacy ever carrying on against a certain
Person of Opulence called the Squire,
whose Property is considered as Free-Booty
by all his poor Neighbours; who, as they
conclude that there is no Manner of Guilt
in such Depredations, look upon it as a
Point of Honour and moral Obligation
to conceal, and to preserve each other from
Punishment on all such Occasions. 
In like Manner are the Ancients, such
as Homer, Virgil, Horace, Cicero, and the
rest, to be esteemed among us Writers,
as so many wealthy Squires, from whom
we, the Poor of Parnassus, claim an
immemorial Custom of taking whatever
we can come at. This Liberty I demand, 

and this I am as ready to allow again
to my poor Neighbours in their Turn. All I
profess, and all I require from my Brethren,
is to maintain the same strict Honesty among
ourselves, which the Mob shew to one another,
To steal from one another, is indeed highly
criminal and indecent; for this may be
strictly stiled defrauding the Poor (sometimes
perhaps those who are poorer than ourselves)
or, to see it under the most opprobrious
Colours, robbing the Spittal. 
Since therefore upon the strictest Examination,
my own Conscience cannot lay any
such pitiful Theft to my Charge, I am
contented to plead guilty to the former Accusation; 
nor shall I ever scruple to take
to my self any Passage which I shall find in
an ancient Author to my Purpose, without
setting down the Name of the Author from
whence it was taken. Nay, I absolutely claim
a Property in all such Sentiments the Moment
they are transcribed into my Writings,
and I expect all Readers henceforwards to
regard them as purely and entirely my own. 
This Claim however I desire to be allowed
me only on Condition, that I preserve strict
Honesty towards my poor Brethren, from
whom if ever I borrow any of that little of
which they are possessed, I shall never fail 

to put their Mark upon it, that it may be
at all Times ready to be restored to the
right Owner. 
The Omission of this was highly blameable
in one Mr. Moore, who having formerly
borrowed some Lines of Pope and
Company, took the Liberty to transcribe
six of them into his Play of the Rival
Modes. Mr. Pope however very luckily
found them in the said Play, and laying
violent Hands on his own Property, transferred
it back again into his own Works; 
and for a further Punishment, imprisoned the
said Moore in the loathsome Dungeon of the
Dunciad, where his unhappy Memory now
remains, and eternally will remain, as a
proper Punishment for such his unjust Dealings
in the poetical Trade. 




In which, tho' the Squire doth not find his
Daughter, something is found which puts
an End to his Pursuit. 
The History now returns to the Inn
at Upton, whence we shall first trace
the Footsteps of Squire Western; for as he
will soon arrive at an End of his Journey,
we shall have then full Leisure to attend
our Heroe. 
The Reader may be pleased to remember,
that the said Squire departed from the
Inn in great Fury, and in that Fury he
pursued his Daughter. The Hostler having
informed him that she had crossed the Severn,
he likewise past that River with his
Equipage, and rode full Speed, vowing
the utmost Vengeance against poor Sophia,
if he should but overtake her. 
He had not gone far, before he arrived
at a Cross way. Here he called a short
Council of War, in which, after hearing
different Opinions, he at last gave the Direction 

of his Pursuit to Fortune, and struck
directly into the Worcester Road. 
In this Road he proceeded about two
Miles, when he began to bemoan himself
most bitterly, frequently crying out, ‘What
Pity is it! Sure never was so unlucky
a Dog as myself!’ and then burst forth a
Volley of Oaths and Execrations. 
The Parson attempted to administer
Comfort to him on this Occasion. ‘Sorrow
not, Sir,’ says he, ‘like those without
Hope. Howbeit we have not yet
been able to overtake young Madam,
we may account it some good Fortune,
that we have hitherto traced her Course
aright. Peradventure she will soon be
fatigated with her Journey, and will tarry
in some Inn, in order to renovate her
corporeal Functions; and in that Case, in
all moral Certainty, you will very briefly
be compos voti.’ 
‘Pogh! D&wblank;n the Slut,’ answered the
Squire, ‘I am lamenting the Loss of so
fine a Morning for Hunting. It is confounded
hard to lose one of the best Scenting
Days, in all Appearance, which hath 

been this Season, and especially after so
long a Frost.’ 
Whether Fortune, who now and then
shews some Compassion in her wantonest
Tricks, might not take Pity of the Squire; 
and as she had determined not to let him
overtake his Daughter, might not resolve
to make him Amends some other Way,
I will not assert; but he had hardly uttered
the Words just before commemorated,
and two or three Oaths at their Heels,
when a Pack of Hounds began to open
their melodious Throats at a small Distance
from them, which the Squire's Horse and
his Rider both perceiving, both immediately
pricked up their Ears, and the Squire
crying, ‘She's gone, she's gone! Damn
me if she is not gone!’ instantly clapped
Spurs to the Beast, who little needed it,
having indeed the same Inclination with his
Master; and now the whole Company crossing
into a Corn-field, rode directly towards
the Hounds, with much Hollowing and
Hooping, while the poor Parson, blessing
himself, brought up the Rear. 
Thus Fable reports, that the fair Grimalkin,
whom Venus, at the Desire, of a passionate
Lover, converted from a Cat into a fine 

Woman, no sooner perceived a Mouse,
than mindful of her former Sport, and still
retaining her pristine Nature, she leapt from
the Bed of her Husband to pursue the little
Animal. 
What are we to understand by this? Not
that the Bride was displeased with the Embraces
of her amorous Bridegroom: For
tho' some have remarked that Cats are
subject to Ingratitude, yet Women and
Cats too will be pleased and purr on certain
Occasions. The Truth is, as the sagacious
Sir Roger L'Estrange observes, in his deep
Reflections, that ‘if we shut Nature out
at the Door, she will come in at the Window; 
and that Puss, tho' a Madam, will
be a Mouser still.’ In the same Manner
we are not to arraign the Squire of any
Want of Love for his Daughter: For in
reality he had a great deal; we are only to
consider that he was a Squire and a Sportsman,
and then we may apply the Fable to
him, and the judicious Reflections likewise. 
The Hounds ran very hard, as it is
called, and the Squire pursued over Hedge
and Ditch, with all his usual Vociferation
and Alacrity, and with all his usual Pleasure; 

nor did the Thoughts of Sophia ever
once intrude themselves to allay the Satisfaction
he enjoyed in the Chace,
which, he said, was one of the finest he ever
saw, and which he swore was very well
worth going fifty Miles for. As the Squire
forgot his Daughter, the Servants, we may
easily believe, forgot their Mistress; and the
Parson, after having express'd much Astonishment
in Latin to himself, at length likewise
abandoned all farther Thoughts of the
young Lady, and jogging on at a Distance
behind, began to meditate a Portion of
Doctrine for the ensuing Sunday. 
The Squire who owned the Hounds was
highly pleased with the Arrival of his Brother
Squire and Sportsman: For all Men
approve Merit in their own Way, and no
Man was more expert in the Field than
Mr. Western, nor did any other better know
how to encourage the Dogs with his Voice,
and to animate the Hunt with his Holla. 
Sportsmen, in the Warmth of a Chace,
are too much engaged to attend to any
Manner of Ceremony; nay, even to the
Offices of Humanity: For if any of them
meet with an Accident by tumbling into a
Ditch, or into a River, the rest pass on regardless, 

and generally leave him to his
Fate; during this Time, therefore, the two
Squires, tho' often close to each other, interchanged
not a single Word. The Master
of the Hunt, however, often saw and approved
the great Judgment of the Stranger
in drawing the Dogs when they were at a
Fault, and hence conceived a very high Opinion
of his Understanding, as the Number
of his Attendants inspired no small Reverence
to his Quality. As soon therefore as
the Sport was ended by the Death of the
little Animal which had occasioned it, the
two Squires met, and in all Squire-like
Greeting, saluted each other. 
The Conversation was entertaining enough,
and what we may perhaps relate in an
Appendix, or on some other Occasion; but
as it nowise concerns this History, we cannot
prevail on ourselves to give it a Place
here. It concluded with a second Chace,
and that with an Invitation to Dinner. This
being accepted, was followed by a hearty
Bout of Drinking, which ended in as hearty
a Nap on the Part of Squire Western. 
Our Squire was by no Means a Match
either for his Host, or for Parson Supple, at
his Cups that Evening; for which the violent 

Fatigue of Mind as well as Body that
he had undergone, may very well account,
without the least Derogation from his Honour. 
He was indeed, according to the
vulgar Phrase, whistled drunk; for before
he had swallowed the third Bottle, he became
so entirely overpowered, that tho' he
was not carried off to Bed till long after,
the Parson considered him as absent, and
having acquainted the other Squire with all
relating to Sophia, he obtained his Promise
of seconding those Arguments which he
intended to urge the next Morning for
Mr. Western's Return. 
No sooner therefore had the good Squire
shaken off his Evening, and began to call
for his Morning Draught, and to summon his
Horses in order to renew his Pursuit, than
Mr. Supple began his Dissuasives, which
the Host so strongly seconded, that they
at length prevailed, and Mr. Western agreed
to return home; being principally moved
by one Argument, viz. That he knew not
which Way to go, and might probably
be riding farther from his Daughter instead
of towards her. He then took Leave of
his Brother Sportsman, and expressing great
Joy that the Frost was broken (which might
perhaps be no small Motive to his hastening 

home) set forwards, or rather backwards,
for Somersetshire; but not before he had first
dispatched Part of his Retinue in quest of
his Daughter, after whom he likewise sent
a Volley of the most bitter Execrations
which he could invent. 



The Departure of Jones from Upton, with
what past between him and Partridge on
the Road. 
At length we are once more come to our
Heroe; and to say Truth, we have
been obliged to part with him so long, that
considering the Condition in which we left
him, I apprehend many of our Readers have
concluded we intended to abandon him for
ever; he being at present in that Situation
in which prudent People usually desist from
enquiring any farther after their Friends,
lest they should be shocked by hearing such
Friends had hanged themselves. 
But, in reality, if we have not all the
Virtues, I will boldly say, neither have we
all the Vices of a prudent Character; and
tho' it is not easy to conceive Circumstances 

much more miserable than those of
poor Jones at present, we shall return to him,
and attend upon him with the same Diligence
as if he was wantoning in the brightest
Beams of Fortune. 
Mr. Jones then, and his Companion
Partridge, left the Inn a few Minutes after
the Departure of Squire Western, and pursued
the same Road on Foot; for the Ostler
told them, that no Horses were by any
Means to be at that Time procured at Upton. 
On they marched with heavy Hearts; for
tho' their Disquiet proceeded from very
different Reasons, yet displeased they were
both; and if Jones sighed bitterly, Partridge
grunted altogether as sadly at every
Step. 
When they came to the Cross-roads
where the Squire had stopt to take Council,
Jones stopt likewise, and turning to Partridge,
asked his Opinion which Track they
should pursue. ‘Ah, Sir!’ answered Partridge,
‘I wish your Honour would follow
my Advice.’ ‘Why should I not?’ replied
Jones; ‘for it is now indifferent to
me whither I go, or what becomes of me? 
My Advice then,’ said Partridge, ‘is that
you immediately face about and return 

home: For who that had such a Home
to return to, as your Honour, would
travel thus about the Country like a Vagabond? 
I ask Pardon, sed vox ea sola
reperta est.’ 
‘Alas!’ cries Jones, ‘I have no Home
to return to;—but if my Friend, my
Father would receive me, could I bear
the Country from which Sophia is flown–– 
Cruel Sophia! Cruel! No. Let me blame
myself—No, let me blame thee. D&wblank;nation
seize thee, Fool, Blockhead! thou
hast undone me, and I will tear thy Soul
from thy Body—At which Words he laid
violent Hands on the Collar of poor Partridge,
and shook him more heartily than
an Ague Fit, or his own Fears had ever
done before.’ 
Partridge fell trembling on his Knees, and
begged for Mercy, vowing he had meant
no Harm—when Jones, after staring wildly
on him for a Moment, quitted his Hold; 
and discharged a Rage on himself, that
had it fallen on the other, would certainly
have put an End to his Being, which indeed
the very Apprehension of it had almost
effected. 

We would bestow some Pains here in minutely
describing all the mad Pranks which
Jones played on this Occasion, could we be
well assured that the Reader would take the
same Pains in perusing them; but as we are
apprehensive that after all the Labour which
we should employ in painting this Scene,
the said Reader would be very apt to skip
it entirely over, we have saved ourself
that Trouble. To say the Truth, we have,
from this Reason alone, often done great
Violence to the Luxuriance of our Genius,
and have left many excellent Descriptions
out of our Work, which would otherwise
have been in it. And this Suspicion, to
be honest, arises, as is generally the Case,
from our own wicked Heart; for we have,
ourselves, been very often most horridly
given to jumping, as we have run through
the Pages of voluminous Historians. 
Suffice it then simply to say, that Jones,
after having played the Part of a Madman
for many Minutes, came, by Degrees, to
himself; which no sooner happened, than
turning to Partridge, he very earnestly begged
his Pardon for the Attack he had made
on him in the Violence of his Passion; 
but concluded, by desiring him never to 

mention his Return again; for he was resolved
never to see that Country any more. 
Partridge easily forgave, and faithfully
promised to obey the Injunction now
laid upon him. And then Jones very
briskly cried out: ‘Since it is absolutely
impossible for me to pursue any farther
the Steps of my Angel—I will pursue
those of Glory. Come on, my brave
Lad, now for the Army: —It is a glorious
Cause, and I would willingly sacrifice
my Life in it, even tho' it was worth
my preserving.’ And so saying, he immediately
struck into the different Road
from that which the Squire had taken, and,
by mere Chance, pursued the very same
thro' which Sophia had before passed. 
Our Travellers now marched a full Mile,
without speaking a Syllable to each other,
tho' Jones, indeed, muttered many Things
to himself; as to Partridge, he was profoundly
silent: For he was not, perhaps,
perfectly recovered from his former Fright; 
besides, he had Apprehensions of provoking
his Friend to a second Fit of Wrath; especially
as he now began to entertain a Conceit,
which may not, perhaps, create any
great Wonder in the Reader. In short, he 

began now to suspect that Jones was absolutely
out of his Senses. 
At length, Jones being weary of Soliloquy,
addressed himself to his Companion,
and blamed him for his Taciturnity: For
which the poor Man very honestly accounted,
from his Fear of giving Offence. And
now this Fear being pretty well removed,
by the most absolute Promises of Indemnity,
Partridge again took the Bridle from his
Tongue; which, perhaps, rejoiced no less
at regaining its Liberty, than a young Colt,
when the Bridle is slipt from his Neck, and
he is turned loose into the Pastures. 
As Partridge was inhibited from that Topic
which would have first suggested itself,
he fell upon that which was next uppermost
in his Mind, namely, the Man of the Hill. 
Certainly, Sir, says he, that could never
be a Man, who dresses himself, and lives
after such a strange Manner, and so unlike
other Folks. Besides his Diet, as
the old Woman told me, is chiefly upon
Herbs, which is a fitter Food for a Horse
than a Christian: Nay, Landlord at Upton
says, that the Neighbours thereabouts
have very fearful Notions about him. 
It runs strangely in my Head, that it 

must have been some Spirit, who, perhaps,
might be sent to forewarn us: And
who knows, but all that Matter which he
told us, of his going to Fight, and of
his being taken Prisoner, and of the
great Danger he was in of being hanged,
might be intended as a Warning to us,
considering what we are going about: 
Besides, I dreamt of nothing all last Night,
but of Fighting; and methought the
Blood ran out of my Nose, as Liquor
out of a Tap. Indeed, Sir, infandum,
Regina, jubes renovare dolorem.’ 
‘Thy Story, Partridge,’ answered Jones,
‘is almost as ill applied as thy Latin. Nothing
can be more likely to happen than
Death, to Men who go into Battle. 
Perhaps we shall both fall in it,—and
what then?’ ‘What then!’ replied Partridge; 
‘Why then there is an End of us,
is there not? When I am gone, all is
over with me. What matters the Cause
to me, or who gets the Victory, if I am
killed? I shall never enjoy any Advantage
from it. What are all the ringing
of Bells, and Bonfires, to one that is six
Foot under Ground? There will be an
End of poor Partridge.’ ‘And an End
of poor Partridge,’ cries Jones, ‘there 

must be one Time or other. If you
love Latin, I will repeat you some fine
Lines out of Horace, which would inspire
Courage into a Coward. 

Dulce & decorum est pro Patria mori.
Mors & fugacem persequitur virum
 Nec parcit imbellis juventæ
  Poplitibus, timidoque tergo.
‘I wish you would construe them,’ cries
Partridge, ‘for Horace is a hard Author; 
and I cannot understand as you repeat
them.’ 
‘I will repeat you a bad Imitation, or
rather Paraphrase of my own,’ said Jones; 
‘for I am but an indifferent Poet. 
‘Who would not die in his dear Country's Cause?
‘Since if base Fear his dastard Step withdraws,
‘From Death he cannot fly:—One common Grave
‘Receives, at last, the Coward and the Brave.’
‘That's very certain,’ cries Partridge. 
Ay, sure, Mors omnibus communis: But 

there is a great Difference between dying
in ones Bed a great many Years hence,
like a good Christian, with all our
Friends crying about us; and being shot
To-Day or Tomorrow, like a Mad-Dog; 
or, perhaps, hacked in twenty Pieces
with a Sword, and that too, before we
have repented of all our Sins. O Lord
have Mercy upon us! To be sure, the
Soldiers are a wicked Kind of People. 
I never loved to have any Thing to do
with them. I never could bring myself
hardly to look upon them as Christians. 
There is nothing but Cursing and Swearing
among them. I wish your Honour
would repent: I heartily wish you would
repent, before it is too late; and not
think of going among them. —Evil
Communication corrupts good Manners. 
That is my principal Reason. For as for
that Matter, I am no more afraid than
another Man, not I; as to Matter of
that. I know all human Flesh must die; 
but yet a Man may live many Years for
all that. Why I am a middle-aged Man
now, and yet I may live a great Number
of Years. I have read of several
who have lived to be above a hundred,
and some a great deal above a hundred. 
Not that I hope, I mean that I promise
myself, to live to any such Age as that 

neither—––But if it be only to eighty or
ninety: Heaven be praised, that is a
great Ways off yet; and I am not afraid of
dying then, no more than another Man: 
But, surely, to tempt Death before a
Man's Time is come, seems to me downright
Wickedness and Presumption. Besides,
if it was to do any Good indeed; 
but let the Cause be what it will,
what mighty Matter of Good can two
People do? And, for my Part, I understand
nothing of it. I never fired
off a Gun above ten Times in my Life; 
and then it was not charged with Bullets. 
And for the Sword, I never learned to
fence, nor  know nothing of the Matter. 
And then there are those Cannons, which
certainly it must be thought the highest
Presumption to go in the Way of; 
and no Body but a Madman—I ask
Pardon; upon my Soul, I meant no
Harm: I beg I may not throw your Honour
into another Passion.’ 
‘Be under no Apprhension, Partridge,’ 
cries Jones, ‘I am now so well convinced of
thy Cowardice, that thou couldst not provoke
me on any Account.’ ‘Your Honour,’ 
answered he, ‘may call me Coward
or any thing else you please. If loving
to sleep in a whole Skin makes a Man a 

Coward, non immunes ab illis malis sumus. 
I never read in my Grammar, that a Man
can't be a good Man without fighting. 
Vir bonus est quis? Qui consulta Patrum,
qui leges juraque servat. Not a Word of
Fighting; and I am sure the Scripture is
so much against it, that a Man shall never
persuade me he is a good Christian while
he sheds Christian-blood.’ 



The Adventure of a Beggar-Man. 
Just as Partridge had uttered that good
and pious Doctrine, with which the last
Chapter concluded, they arrived at another
Cross-way, when a lame Fellow in Rags,
asked them for Alms; upon which Partridge
gave him a severe Rebuke, saying,
‘Every Parish ought to keep their own
Poor.’ Jones then fell a laughing, and
asked Partridge, if he was not ashamed
with so much Charity in his Mouth to have
no Charity in his Heart. ‘Your Religion,
says he, serves you only for an Excuse
for your Faults, but is no Incentive to
your Virtue. Can any Man who is really
a Christian abstain from relieving one of 

his Brethren in such a miserable Condition?’ 
and at the same time putting his Hand in
his Pocket, he gave the poor Object a Shilling. 
‘Master,’ cries the fellow, after thanking
him, ‘I have a curious Thing here in
my Pocket, which I found about two
Miles off, if your Worship will please to
buy it. I should not venture to pull it
out to every one; but as you are so good
a Gentleman, and so kind to the Poor,
you won't suspect a Man of being
a Thief only because he is poor.’ He then
pulled out a little gilt Pocket-book, and
delivered it into the Hands of Jones. 
Jones presently opened it, and (guess,
Reader, what he felt,) saw in the first
Page the Words Sophia Western, written
by her own fair Hand. He no sooner read
the Name, than he prest it close to his
Lips; nor could he avoid falling into some
very frantic Raptures, notwithstanding his
Company; but, perhaps, these very Raptures
made him forget he was not alone. 
While Jones was kissing and mumbling
the Book, as if he had had an excellent
brown butter'd Crust in his Mouth, or as 

if he had really been a Bookworm, or an
Author, who hath nothing to eat but his
own Works, a Piece of Paper fell from its
Leaves to the Ground, which Partridge
took up, and delivered to Jones, who presently
perceived it to be a Bank-bill. It
was, indeed, the very Bill which Western
had given his Daughter, the Night before
her Departure; and a Jew would have
jumped to purchase it at five Shillings less
than 100l. 
The Eyes of Partridge sparkled at this
News, which Jones now proclaimed aloud; 
and so did (tho' with somewhat a different
Aspect) those of the poor Fellow who had
found the Book; and who (I hope from
a Principle of Honesty) had never opened
it: But we should not deal honestly by the
Reader, if we omitted to inform him of a
Circumstance, which may be here a little
material, viz. That the Fellow could not
read. 
Jones, who had felt nothing but pure
Joy and Transport from the finding the
Book, was affected with a Mixture of Concern
at this new Discovery: For his Imagination
instantly suggested to him, that
the Owner of the Bill might possibly want 

it, before he should be able to convey it to
her. He then acquainted the Finder, that
he knew the Lady to whom the Book belonged,
and would endeavour to find her
out as soon as possible, and return it
her. 
The Pocket-Book was a late Present
from Mrs. Western to her Niece: It
had cost five and twenty Shillings, having
been bought of a celebrated Toyman,
but the real Value of the Silver, which it contained
in its Clasp, was about 18d. and
that Price the said Toyman, as it was altogether
as good as when it first issued from
his Shop, would now have given for it. 
A prudent Person would, however, have
taken proper Advantage of the Ignorance
of this Fellow, and would not have offer'd
more than a Shilling, or perhaps Sixpence
for it; nay, some perhaps would have
given nothing, and left the Fellow to his
Action of Trover, which some learned Serjeants
may doubt whether he could, under
these Circumstances, have maintained. 
Jones, on the contrary, whose Character
was on the Outside of Generosity, and
may perhaps not very unjustly have been
suspected of Extravagance, without any 

Hesitation, gave a Guinea in Exchange for
the Book. The poor Man, who had not
for a long Time before, been possessed of
so much Treasure, gave Mr. Jones a thousand
Thanks, and discovered little less
of Transport in his Muscles, than Jones had
before shewn, when he had first read the
Name of Sophia Western. 
The Fellow very readily agreed to attend
our Travellers to the Place where he
had found the Pocket-Book. Together,
therefore, they proceeded directly thither; 
but not so fast as Mr. Jones desired; for his
Guide unfortunately happened to be lame,
and could not possibly travel faster than a
Mile an Hour. As this Place, therefore,
was at above three Miles Distance, though
the Fellow had said otherwise, the Reader
need not be acquainted how long they were
in walking it. 
Jones opened the Book a hundred Times
during their Walk, kissed it as often, talked
much to himself, and very little to his
Companions. At all which the Guide exprest
some Signs of Astonishment to Partridge; 
who more than once shook his
Head, and cry'd, poor Gentleman! orandum
est ut sit mens sana in corpore sano. 

At length, they arrived at the very Spot,
where Sophia unhappily dropt the Pocket-Book,
and where the Fellow had as happily
found it. Here Jones offered to take
Leave of his Guide, and to improve his
Pace; but the Fellow, in whom that violent
Surprize and Joy which the first Receipt
of the Guinea had occasioned, was now
considerably abated, and who had now had
sufficient Time to recollect himself, put on
a discontented Look, and, scratching his
Head, said, ‘He hoped his Worship would
give him something more. Your Worship,’ 
said he, ‘will, I hope, take it into
your Consideration, that if I had not
been honest I might have kept the
Whole.’ And, indeed, this the Reader
must confess to have been true. ‘If the
Paper there,’ said he, ‘be worth 100l.
I am sure the finding it deserves more
than a Guinea. Besides, suppose your
Worship should never see the Lady, nor
give it her—and though your Worship
looks and talks very much like a Gentleman,
yet I have only your Worship's
bare Word: And, certainly, if the right
Owner ben't to be found, it all belongs
to the first Finder. I hope your Worship
will consider all these Matters. I 

am but a poor Man, and therefore
don't desire to have all; but it is but
reasonable I should have my Share.’ 
‘Your Worship looks like a good Man,
and, I hope, will consider my Honesty: 
For I might have kept every Farthing,
and no Body ever the wiser.’ ‘I promise
thee, upon my Honour,’ cries Jones,
‘that I know the right Owner, and will
restore it her.’ ‘Nay, your Worship,’ 
answered the Fellow, ‘may do as you
please as to that, if you will but give
me my Share, that is one half of the
Money, your Honour may keep the rest
yourself if you please;’ and concluded
with swearing by a very vehement Oath,
‘that he would never mention a Syllable
of it to any Man living.’ 
‘Lookee, Friend,’ cries Jones, ‘the
right Owner shall certainly have again all
that she lost; and as for any further Gratuity,
I really cannot give it you at present; 
but let me know your Name, and
where you live, and it is more than possible,
you may hereafter have further Reason
to rejoice at this Morning's Adventure.’ 

‘I don't know what you mean by Venture,’ 
cries the Fellow; ‘it seems, I
must venture whether you will return the
Lady her Money or no: But I hope
your Worship will consider—’ ‘Come,
come,’ said Partridge, ‘tell his Honour
your Name, and where you may be
found; I warrant you will never repent
having put the Money into his Hands.’ 
The Fellow seeing no Hopes of recovering
the Possession of the Pocket-Book, at last
complied in giving in his Name and Place of
Abode, which Jones writ upon a Piece of
Paper with the Pencil of Sophia; and then
placing the Paper in the same Page where
she had writ her Name, he cry'd out: 
‘There, Friend, you are the happiest Man
alive, I have joined your Name to that
of an Angel.’ ‘I don't know any
Thing about Angels,’ answered the Fellow; 
‘but I wish you would give me a
little more Money, or else return me the
Pocket-Book.’ Partridge now waxed
wroth; he called the poor Cripple by several
vile and opprobrious Names, and was
absolutely proceeding to beat him, but Jones
would not suffer any such Thing: And
now telling the Fellow he would certainly
find some Opportunity of serving him, Mr. 

Jones departed as fast as his Heels would
carry him; and Partridge, into whom the
Thoughts of the hundred Pound had infused
new Spirits, followed his Leader; 
while the Man who was obliged to stay
behind, fell to cursing them both, as well
as his Parents; ‘For had they, says he,
sent me to Charity-School to learn to
write and read and cast Account, I should
have known the Value of these Matters
as well as other People.’ 



Containing more Adventures which Mr. Jones
and his Companion met on the Road. 
Our Travellers now walked so fast,
that they had very little Time or
Breath for Conversation; Jones meditating
all the Way on Sophia, and Partridge on the
Bank-Bill, which, though it gave him some
Pleasure, caused him at the same Time to repine
at Fortune, which, in all his Walks,
had never given him such an Opportunity
of shewing his Honesty. They had proceeded
above three Miles, when Partridge being
unable any longer to keep up with Jones,
called to him, and begged him a little to 

slacken his Pace; with this he was the
more ready to comply, as he had for
some Time lost the Footsteps of the Horses,
which the Thaw had enabled him to trace
during several Miles, and he was now upon
a wide Common where were several Roads. 
He here therefore stopt to consider which
of these Roads he should pursue, when on
a sudden they heard the Noise of a Drum
that seemed at no great Distance. This
Sound presently alarmed the Fears of Partridge,
and he cried out, ‘Lord have
Mercy upon us all; they are certainly a
coming!’ ‘Who is coming?’ cries Jones,
for Fear had long since given Place to softer
Ideas in his Mind, and since his Adventure
with the lame Man, he had been totally intent
on pursuing Sophia, without entertaining
one Thought of an Enemy. ‘Who?’ 
cries Partridge, ‘why the Rebels; but
why should I call them Rebels, they may
be very honest Gentlemen, for any thing
I know to the contrary. The Devil take
him that affronts them, I say. I am
sure, if they have nothing to say to me,
I will have nothing to say to them but in
a civil Way. For Heaven's Sake, Sir,
don't affront them if they should come,
and perhaps they may do us no Harm; 

but would it not be the wiser Way to
creep into some of yonder Bushes till they
are gone by? What can two unarmed
Men do perhaps against fifty thousand? 
Certainly nobody but a Madman; I
hope your Honour is not offended; but
certainly no Man who hath Mens sana in
Corpore sano’—Here Jones interrupted
this Torrent of Eloquence, which Fear had
inspired, saying, ‘That by the Drum he
perceived they were near some Town.’ 
He then made directly towards the Place
whence the Noise proceeded, bidding Partridge
‘take Courage, for that he would
lead him into no Danger; and adding,
it was impossible the Rebels should be so
near.’ 
Partridge was a little comforted with this
last Assurance; and tho' he would more
gladly have gone the contrary Way, he
followed his Leader, his Heart beating
Time, but not after the Manner of Heroes,
to the Music of the Drum, which ceased
not till they had traversed the Common,
and were come into a narrow Lane. 
And now Partridge, who kept even Pace
with Jones, discovered something painted
flying in the Air, a very few Yards before 

him, which fancying to be the Colours
of the Enemy, he fell a bellowing, ‘O
Lord, Sir, here they are, there is the
Crown and Coffin. Oh Lord! I never
saw any thing so terrible; and we are
within Gun-shot of them already.’ 
Jones no sooner looked up than he plainly
perceived what it was which Partridge had
thus mistaken. ‘Partridge,’ says he, ‘I
fancy you will be able to engage this
whole Army yourself; for by the Colours
I guess what the Drum was which we
heard before, and which beats up for Recruits
to a Puppet-show.’ 
‘A Puppet-show!’ answered Partridge,
with most eager Transport. And is
it really no more than that? I love a
Puppet-show of all the Pastimes upon
Earth. Do, good Sir, let us tarry and
see it. Besides I am quite famished to
Death; for it is now almost dark, and I
have not eat a Morsel since three o'Clock
in the Morning.’ 
They now arrived at an Inn, or indeed an
Alehouse, where Jones was prevailed upon
to stop, the rather as he had no longer any
Assurance of being in the Road he desired. 
They walked both directly into the Kitchin, 

where Jones began to enquire if no Ladies
had passed that Way in the Morning, and
Partridge as eagerly examined into the State
of their Provisions; and indeed his Enquiry
met with the better Success; for Jones
could not hear News of Sophia; but Partridge,
to his great Satisfaction, found good
Reason to expect very shortly the agreeable
Sight of an excellent smoaking Dish of
Eggs and Bacon. 
In strong and healthy Constitutions Love
hath a very different Effect from what it
causes in the puny Part of the Species. In
the latter it generally destroys all that Appetite
which tends towards the Conservation
of the Individual; but in the former, tho'
it often induces Forgetfulness, and a Neglect
of Food, as well as of every thing
else, yet place a good Piece of well-powdered
Buttock before a hungry Lover, and
he seldoms fails very handsomely to play
his Part. Thus it happened in the present
Case; for tho' Jones perhaps wanted a
Prompter, and might have travelled much
farther, had he been alone, with an empty
Stomach, yet no sooner did he sit down to
the Bacon and Eggs, than he fell to as heartily
and voraciously as Partridge himself. 

Before our Travellers had finished their
Dinner, Night came on, and as the Moon
was now past the full, it was extremely
dark. Partridge therefore prevailed on
Jones to stay and see the Puppet-show, which
was just going to begin, and to which they
were very eagerly invited by the Master of
the said Show, who declared that his Figures
were the finest which the World had ever
produced, and that they had given great
Satisfaction to all the Quality in every Town
in England. 
The Puppet-show was performed with
great Regularity and Decency. It was called
the fine and serious Part of the Provok'd
Husband; and it was indeed a very grave
and solemn Entertainment, without any low
Wit or Humour, or Jests; or, to do it no
more than Justice, without any thing which
could provoke a Laugh. The Audience
were all highly pleased. A grave Matron told
the Master she would bring her two Daughters
the next Night, as he did not shew any
Stuff; and an Attorney's Clerk, and an
Exciseman, both declared, that the Characters
of Lord and Lady Townly were well
preserved, and highly in Nature. Partridge
likewise concurred with this Opinion. 

The Master was so highly elated with
these Encomiums, that he could not refrain
from adding some more of his own. He
said, ‘The present Age was not improved
in any Thing so much as in their Puppet-shows; 
which, by throwing out Punch
and his Wife Joan, and such idle Trumpery,
were at last brought to be a rational
Entertainment. I remember,’ said he,
‘when I first took to the Business, there
was a great deal of low Stuff that did
very well to make Folks laugh; but was
never calculated to improve the Morals
of young People, which certainly ought
to be principally aimed at in every Puppet-show: 
For why may not good and instructive
Lessons be conveyed this Way,
as well as any other? My Figures are as
big as the Life, and they represent the
Life in every Particular; and I question
not but People rise from my little Drama
as much improved as they do from the
great.’ ‘I would by no Means degrade the
Ingenuity of your Profession,’ answered
Jones; ‘but I should have been glad to have
seen my old Acquaintance Master Punch
for all that; and so far from improving,
I think, by leaving out him and his merry 

Wife Joan, you have spoiled your Puppet-show.’ 
The Dancer of Wires conceived an immediate
and high Contempt for Jones, from
these Words. And with much Disdain in
his Countenance, he replied, ‘Very probably,
Sir, that may be your Opinion; 
but I have the Satisfaction to know the
best Judges differ from you, and it is impossible
to please every Taste. I confess,
indeed, some of the Quality at Bath, two
or three Years ago, wanted mightily to
bring Punch again upon the Stage. I
believe I lost some Money for not agreeing
to it; but let others do as they will,
a little Matter shall never bribe me to degrade
my own Profession, nor will I ever
willingly consent to the spoiling the Decency
and Regularity of my Stage, by introducing
any such low Stuff upon it.’ 
‘Right, Friend,’ cries the Clerk, ‘you
are very right. Always avoid what is
low. There are several of my Acquaintance
in London, who are resolved to drive
every thing which is low from the Stage. 
Nothing can be more proper,’ cries the
Exciseman, pulling his Pipe from his
Mouth. ‘I remember,’ added he, ‘(for 

I then lived with my Lord) I was in the
Footman's Gallery, the Night when this
Play of the Provok'd Husband was acted
first. There was a great deal of low Stuff
in it about a Country Gentleman come up
to Town to stand for Parliament Man; 
and there they brought a Parcel of his
Servants upon the Stage, his Coachman I
remember particularly; but the Gentlemen
in our Gallery could not bear any
thing so low, and they damned it. I observe,
Friend, you have left all that Matter
out, and you are to be commended
for it.’ 
‘Nay, Gentlemen,’ cries Jones, ‘I can
never maintain my Opinion against so
many; indeed if the Generality of his
Audience dislike him, the learned Gentleman
who conducts the Show may have
done very right in dismissing Punch from
his Service.’ 
The Master of the Show then began a second
Harangue, and said much of the great
Force of Example, and how much the inferior
Part of Mankind would be deterred
from Vice, by observing how odious it was
in their Superiors; when he was unluckily
interrupted by an Incident, which, though 

perhaps we might have omitted it at another
Time, we cannot help relating at present,
but not in this Chapter. 



From which it may be inferred, that the best
Things are liable to be misunderstood and
misinterpreted. 
A violent Uproar now arose in the Entry,
where my Landlady was well
cuffing her Maid both with her Fist and
Tongue. She had indeed missed the Wench
from her Employment, and, after a little
Search, had found her on the Puppet-show
Stage in Company with the Merry Andrew,
and in a Situation not very proper to be described. 
Tho' Grace (for that was her Name) had
forfeited all Title to Modesty, yet had she
not Impudence enough to deny a Fact in
which she was actually surprized; she therefore
took another Turn, and attempted to
mitigate the Offence. ‘Why do you beat
me in this Manner, Mistress?’ cries the
Wench. ‘If you don't like my Doings,
you may turn me away. If I am a 

W&wblank;e (for the other had liberally bestowed
that Appellation on her) my Betters are
so as well as I? What was the fine Lady
in the Puppet-show just now. I suppose
she did not lie all Night out from her
Husband for nothing.’ 
The Landlady now burst into the Kitchin,
and fell foul on both her Husband and the
poor Puppet-mover. ‘Here, Husband,’ says
she, ‘you see the Consequence of harbouring
these People in your House. If one
doth draw a little Drink the more for
them, one is hardly made Amends by 
the Litter they make; and then to have
one's House made a Bawdyhouse of by
such lousy Vermin. In short, I desire
you would be gone to-morrow Morning; 
for I will tolerate no more such Doings. 
It is only the Way to teach our Servants
Idleness and Nonsense; for to be sure nothing
better can be learned by such idle
Shows as these. I remember when Puppet-shows
were made of good Scripture
Stories, as Jephtha's Rash Vow, and such
good Things, and when wicked People
were carried away by the Devil. There
was some Sense in those Matters; but as
the Parson told us last Sunday, nobody
believes in the Devil now-a-days; and 

here you bring about a Parcel of Puppets
drest up like Lords and Ladies, only to
turn the Heads of poor Country Wenches,
and when their Heads are once turned
topsy turvy, no wonder every thing else
is so.’ 
Virgil, I think, tells us, that when the
Mob are assembled in a riotous and tumultuous
Manner, and all Sorts of missile
Weapons fly about, if a Man of Gravity
and Authority appears amongst them, the
Tumult is presently appeased, and the Mob,
which when collected into one Body, may
be well compared to an Ass, erect their
long Ears at the grave Man's Discourse. 
On the contrary, when a Set of grave
Men and Philosophers are disputing; 
when Wisdom herself may in a Manner be
considered as present, and administring
Arguments to the Disputants, should a
Tumult arise among the Mob, or
should one Scold, who is herself equal
in Noise to a mighty Mob, appear
among the said Philosophers; their Disputes
cease in a Moment, Wisdom no longer
performs her ministerial Office, and the
Attention of every one is immediately attracted
by the Scold alone. 

Thus the Uproar aforesaid, and the Arrival
of the Landlady, silenced the Master
of the Puppet-show, and put a speedy and
final End to that grave and solemn Harangue,
of which we have given the Reader
a sufficient Taste already. Nothing
indeed could have happened so very inopportune
as this Accident; the most wanton
Malice of Fortune could not have contrived
such another Stratagem to confound the
poor Fellow, while he was so triumphantly
descanting on the good Morals inculcated
by his Exhibitions. His Mouth was now
as effectually stopt, as that of a Quack must
be, if in the Midst of a Declamation on
the great Virtues of his Pills and Powders,
the Corpse of one of his Martyrs should be
brought forth, and deposited before the
Stage, as a Testimony of his Skill. 
Instead, therefore, of answering my Landlady,
the Puppet-show Man ran out to punish
his Merry Andrew; and now the Moon
beginning to put forth her Silver Light,
as the Poets call it (tho' she looked at that
Time more like a Piece of Copper) Jones
called for his Reckoning, and ordered Partridge,
whom my Landlady had just awaked
from a profound Nap, to prepare for his 

Journey; but Partridge having lately carried
two Points, as my Reader hath seen
before, was emboldened to attempt a third,
which was to prevail with Jones to take up
a Lodging that Evening in the House
where he then was. He introduced this
with an affected Surprize at the Intention
which Mr. Jones declared of removing; and
after urging many excellent Arguments against
it, he at last insisted strongly, that
it could be to no manner of Purpose whatever: 
For that unless Jones knew which Way
the Lady was gone, every Step he took
might very possibly lead him the farther from
her; ‘for you find, Sir,’ said he, ‘by all the
People in the House, that she is not gone
this Way. How much better, therefore,
would it be to stay till the Morning, when
we may expect to meet with Some-body
to enquire of?’ 
This last Argument had indeed some
Effect on Jones, and while he was weighing
it, the Landlord threw all the Rhetoric of
which he was Master into the same Scale. 
‘Sure, Sir,’ said he, ‘your Servant gives
you most excellent Advice: For who
would travel by Night at this Time of
the Year?’ He then began in the usual
Stile to trumpet forth the excellent Accommodation 

which his House afforded; and
my Landlady likewise opened on the Occasion
—But not to detain the Reader with
what is common to every Host and Hostess,
it is sufficient to tell him, Jones was at last prevailed
on to stay and refresh himself with a
few Hours Rest, which indeed he very much
wanted; for he had hardly shut his Eyes
since he had left the Inn where the Accident
of the broken Head had happened. 
As soon as Jones had taken a Resolution
to proceed no farther that Night, he presently
retired to Rest, with his two Bed-fellows
the Pocket-Book, and the Muff; 
but Partridge, who at several Times had
refreshed himself with several Naps, was
more inclined to Eating than to Sleeping,
and more to Drinking than to either. 
And now the Storm which Grace had
risen  being at an End, and my Landlady
being again reconciled to the Puppet-man,
who on his Side forgave the indecent Reflections
which the good Woman in her
Passion had cast on his Performances, a
Face of perfect Peace and Tranquillity
reigned in the Kitchin; where there assembled
round the Fire, the Landlord and
Landlady of the House, the Master of the 

Puppet-show, the Attorney's Clerk, the Exciseman,
and the ingenious Mr. Partridge; 
in which Company past the agreeable Conversation
which will be found in the next
Chapter. 



Containing a Remark or two of our own,
and many more of the good Company assembled
in the Kitchin. 
Though the Pride of Partridge
did not submit to acknowledge himself
a Servant, yet he condescended in most
Particulars to imitate the Manners of that
Rank. One Instance of this was his greatly
magnifying the Fortune of his Companion,
as he called Jones: such is a general
Custom with all Servants among Strangers,
as none of them would willingly be thought
the Attendant on a Beggar: For the higher
the Situation of the Master is, the higher
consequently is that of the Man in his own
Opinion; the Truth of which Observation
appears from the Behaviour of all the Footmen
of the Nobility. 
But tho' Title and Fortune communicate
a Splendor all around them, and the Footmen 

of Men of Quality and of Estate think
themselves entitled to a Part of that Respect
which is paid to the Quality and
Estates of their Masters; it is clearly otherwise
with Regard to Virtue and Understanding. 
These Advantages are strictly
personal, and swallow themselves all the
Respect which is paid to them. To say
the Truth, this is so very little, that they
cannot well afford to let any others partake
with them. As these therefore reflect no Honour
on the Domestic, so neither is he at all
dishonoured by the most deplorable Want
of both in his Master. Indeed it is otherwise
in the Want of what is called Virtue
in a Mistress, the Consequence of which
we have before seen: For in this Dishonour
there is a Kind of Contagion, which, like
that of Poverty, communicates itself to all
who approach it. 
Now for these Reasons we are not to
wonder that Servants (I mean among the
Men only) should have so great Regard
for the Reputation of the Wealth of their
Masters, and little or none at all for
their Character in other Points, and that
tho' they would be ashamed to be the Footman
of a Beggar, they are not so to attend
upon a Rogue, or a Blockhead; and 

do consequently make no Scruple to spread
the Fame of the Iniquities and Follies of
their said Masters as far as possible, and
this often with great Humour and Merriment. 
In reality, a Footman is often a
Wit, as well as a Beau, at the Expence of
the Gentleman whose Livery he wears. 
After Partridge, therefore, had enlarged
greatly on the vast Fortune to which Mr.
Jones was Heir, he very freely communicated
an Apprehension which he had begun
to conceive the Day before, and for
which, as we hinted at that very Time, the
Behaviour of Jones seemed to have furnished
a sufficient Foundation. In short, he was
now pretty well confirmed in an Opinion,
that his Master was out of his Wits, with
which Opinion he very bluntly acquainted
the good Company round the Fire. 
With this Sentiment the Puppet-show
Man immediately coincided. ‘I own,’ said
he, ‘the Gentleman surprized me very
much, when he talked so absurdly about
Puppet-shows. It is indeed hardly to be
conceived that any Man in his Senses
should be so much mistaken; what you
say now, accounts very well for all his
monstrous Notions. Poor Gentleman, I 

am heartily concerned for him; indeed
he hath a strange Wildness about his
Eyes, which I took Notice of before,
tho' I did not mention it.’ 
The Landlord agreed with this last Assertion,
and likewise claimed the Sagacity
of having observed it. ‘And certainly, added
he, ‘it must be so: for no one but a
Madman would have thought of leaving
so good a House, to ramble about the
Country at that Time of Night.’ 
The Exciseman pulling his Pipe from his
Mouth, said, ‘He thought the Gentleman
looked and talked a little wildly,’ and then
turning to Partridge, ‘If he be a Madman,’ 
says he, ‘he should not be suffered
to travel thus about the Country, for
possibly he may do some Mischief. It is
Pity he was not secured and sent home
to his Relations.’ 
Now some Conceits of this Kind were
likewise lurking in the Mind of Partridge: 
For as he was now persuaded that Jones
had run away from Mr. Allworthy, he
promised himself the highest Rewards, if
he could by any Means convey him back. 
But Fear of Jones, of whose Fierceness and 

Strength he had seen, and indeed felt some
Instances, had however represented any
such Scheme as impossible to be executed,
and had discouraged him from applying
himself to form any regular Plan for the
Purpose. But no sooner did he hear the
Sentiments of the Exciseman, than he embraced
that Opportunity of declaring his
own, and expressed a hearty Wish that such
a Matter could be brought about. 
‘Could be brought about?’ says the Exciseman;’ 
why there is nothing easier. 
‘Ah! Sir,’ answered Partridge;’ ‘you
don't know what a Devil of a Fellow he
is. He can take me up with one Hand,
and throw me out at Window, and he
would too, if he did but imagine—’ 
‘Pogh!’ says the Exciseman. ‘I believe
I am as good a Man as he. Besides
here are five of us.’ 
‘I don't know what five,’ cries the
Landlady, ‘my Husband shall have nothing
to do in it. Nor shall any violent
Hands be laid upon any Body in my
House. The young Gentleman is as
pretty a young Gentleman as ever I saw 

in my Life, and I believe he is no more
mad than any of us. What do you tell
of his having a wild Look with his Eyes? 
They are the prettiest Eyes I ever saw,
and he hath the prettiest Look with them; 
and a very modest civil young Man he is. 
I am sure I have bepitied him heartily
ever since. The Gentleman there in the
Corner told us he was crost in Love. 
Certainly it is enough to make any Man,
especially such a sweet young Gentleman
as he is, to look a little otherwise than he
did before. Lady, indeed! What the
Devil would the Lady have better than
such a handsome Man with a great Estate? 
I suppose she is one of your Quality-folks,
one of your Townly Ladies that we saw
last Night in the Puppet-show, who don't
know what they would be at.’ 
The Attorney's Clerk likewise declared
he would have no Concern in the Business,
without the Advice of Council. ‘Suppose,’ 
says he, ‘an Action of false Imprisonment
should be brought against us, what Defence
could we make? Who knows what
may be sufficient Evidence of Madness to
a Jury? But I only speak upon my own
Account; for it don't look well for a
Lawyer to be concerned in these Matters, 

unless it be as a Lawyer. Juries are always
less favourable to us than to other
People. I don't therefore dissuade you,
Mr. Thompson (to the Exciseman) nor the
Gentleman, nor any Body else.’ 
The Exciseman shook his Head at this
Speech, and the Puppet-show-Man said,
‘Madness was sometimes a difficult Matter
for a Jury to decide: For I remember,’ 
says he, ‘I was once present at a Trial of
Madness, where twenty Witnesses swore
that the Person was as mad as a March
Hare; and twenty others, that he was as
much in his Senses as any Man in England. 
—And indeed it was the Opinion of
most People, that it was only a Trick of
his Relations to rob the poor Man of his
Right.’ 
‘Very likely!’ cries the Landlady, ‘I myself
knew a poor Gentleman who was
kept in a Mad-house all his Life by his
Family, and they enjoyed his Estate, but
it did them no Good: For tho' the Law
gave it them, it was the Right of another.’ 
‘Pogh!’ cries the Clerk, with great Contempt,
‘Who hath any Right but what 

the Law gives them? If the Law gave
me the best Estate in the County, I should
never trouble myself much who had the
Right.’ 
‘If it be so,’ says Partridge, Fælix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum.’ 
My Landlord, who had been called out
by the Arrival of a Horseman at the Gate,
now returned into the Kitchin, and with an
affrighted Countenance cried out, ‘What
do you think, Gentlemen? the Rebels
have given the Duke the Slip, and are
got almost to London—It is certainly true,
for a Man on Horseback just now told
me so.’ 
‘I am glad of it with all my Heart,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘then there will be no fighting
in these Parts.’ 
‘I am glad,’ cries the Clerk, ‘for a
better Reason; for I would always have
Right take Place.’ 
‘Ay but,’ answered the Landlord, ‘I
have heard some People say this Man
hath no Right.’ 

‘I will prove the contrary in a Moment,’ 
cries the Clerk; ‘if my Father dies seized
of a Right; do you mind me, seized
of a Right, I say; Doth not that Right
descend to his Son? And doth not one
Right descend as well as another?’ 
‘But how can he have any Right to
make us Papishes?’ says the Landlord. 
‘Never fear that,’ cries Partridge. ‘As
to the Matter of Right, the Gentleman
there hath proved it as clear as the Sun; 
and as to the Matter of Religion, it is
quite out of the Case. The Papists themselves
don't expect any such Thing. A
Popish Priest, whom I know very well,
and who is a very honest Man, told me
upon his Word and Honour they had no
such Design.’ 
‘And another Priest of my Acquaintance,’ 
said the Landlady, ‘hath told me
the same Thing—But my Husband is always
so afraid of Papishes. I know a
great many Papishes that are very honest
Sort of People, and spend their Money
very freely; and it is always a Maxim 

with me, that one Man's Money is as
good as another's.’ 
‘Very true,’ Mistress, ‘said the Puppet-show-Man,
‘I don't care what Religion
comes, provided the Presbyterians are
not uppermost, for they are Enemies to
Puppet-shows.’ 
‘And so you would sacrifice your Religion
to your Interest?’ cries the Exciseman; 
‘and are desirous to see Popery
brought in, are you?’ 
‘Not I truly,’ answered the other, ‘I hate
Popery as much as any Man; but yet it
is a Comfort to one, that one should be
able to live under it, which I could not
do among Presbyterians. To be sure
every Man values his Livelihood first, that
must be granted; and I warrant if you
would confess the Truth, you are more
afraid of losing your Place than any Thing
else; but never fear, Friend, there will
be an Excise under another Government
as well as under this.’ 
‘Why certainly,’ replied the Exciseman,
‘I should be a very ill Man if I did not
honour the King, whose Bread I eat. 

That is no more than natural, as a Man
may say: For what signifies it to me
that there would be an Excise-office under
another Government, since my Friends
would be out, and I could expect no
better than to follow them. No, no,
Friend, I shall never be bubbled out of
my Religion in Hopes only of keeping
my Place under another Government; 
for I should certainly be no better, and
very probably might be worse.’ 
‘Why, that is what I say,’ cries the
Landlord, ‘whenever Folks say who knows
what may happen? Odsooks! should not
I be a Blockhead to lend my Money to
I know not who, because mayhap he may
return it again? I am sure it is safe in
my own Bureau, and there I will keep it.’ 
The Attorney's Clerk had taken a great
Fancy to the Sagacity of Partridge. Whether
this proceeded from the great Discernment
which the former had into Men,
as well as Things, or whether it arose
from the Sympathy between their Minds; 
for they were both truly Jacobites in Principle; 
they now shook Hands heartily,
and drank Bumpers of Strong Beer to 

Healths which we think proper to bury in
Oblivion. 
These Healths were afterwards pledged
by all present, and even by my Landlord
himself, tho' reluctantly; but he could not
withstand the Menaces of the Clerk, who
swore he would never set his Foot within
his House again, if he refused. The Bumpers
which were swallowed on this Occasion
soon put an End to the Conversation. 
Here, therefore, we will put an End to
the Chapter. 



In which Fortune seems to have been in a
better Humour with Jones than we have
hitherto seen her. 
As there is no wholesomer, so perhaps
there are few stronger Sleeping Potions
than Fatigue. Of this Jones might
be said to have taken a very large Dose,
and it operated very forcibly upon him. 
He had already slept nine Hours, and might
perhaps have slept longer, had he not
been awakened by a most violent Noise
at his Chamber Door, where the Sound of 

many heavy Blows was accompanied with
as many Exclamations of Murder. Jones
presently leapt from his Bed, where he
found the Master of the Puppet-show belabouring
the Back and Ribs of his poor
Merry Andrew, without either Mercy or
Moderation. 
Jones instantly interposed on Behalf of
the Suffering Party, and pinned the insulting
Conqueror up to the Wall: For the
Puppet-show-Man was no more able to contend
with Jones, than the poor party-coloured
Jester had been to contend with this
Puppet-man. 
But tho' the Merry Andrew was a little Fellow,
and not very strong, he had nevertheless
some Choler about him. He therefore
no sooner found himself delivered from the
Enemy, than he began to attack him with
the only Weapon at which he was his Equal. 
From this he first discharged a Volley
of general abusive Words, and thence
proceeded to some particular Accusations— 
‘D&wblank;n your B&wblank;d, you Rascal,’ says he,
‘I have not only supported you, for you
owe all the Money you get to me; but
I have saved you from the Gallows. Did
you not want to rob the Lady of her 

fine Riding-Habit, no longer ago than
Yesterday, in the Back-lane here? Can
you deny that you wished to have had
her alone in a Wood to strip her, to strip
one of the prettiest Ladies that ever was
seen in the World? and here you have
fallen upon me, and have almost murdered
me for doing no Harm to a Girl
as willing as myself, only because she likes
me better than you.’ 
Jones no sooner heard this, than he
quitted the Master, laying at the same time
the most violent Injunctions of Forbearance
from any further Insult on the Merry Andrew,
and then taking the poor Wretch
with him into his own Apartment, he soon
learnt Tidings of his Sophia, whom the
Fellow, as he was attending his Master
with his Drum the Day before, had seen
pass by. He easily prevailed with the Lad
to shew him the exact Place, and then having
summoned Partridge, he departed with
the utmost Expedition. 
It was almost eight of the Clock before
all Matters could be got ready for his Departure: 
For Partridge was not in any
Haste; nor could the Reckoning be presently
adjusted; and when both these were 

settled and over, Jones would not quit the
Place before he had perfectly reconciled all
Differences between the Master and the Man. 
When this was happily accomplished, he
set forwards, and was by the trusty Merry
Andrew conducted to the Spot by which
Sophia had past; and then having handsomely
rewarded his Conductor, he again
pushed on with the utmost Eagerness, being
highly delighted with the extraordinary
Manner in which he received his Intelligence. 
Of this Partridge was no sooner
acquainted, than he, with great Earnestness,
began to prophesy, and assured Jones,
that he would certainly have good Success
in the End: For, he said, ‘two such Accidents
could never have happened to direct
him after his Mistress, if Providence
had not designed to bring them together
at last.’ And this was the first Time that
Jones lent any Attention to the superstitious
Doctrines of his Companion. 
They had not gone above two Miles,
when a violent Storm of Rain overtook
them, and as they happened to be at the
same Time in Sight of an Alehouse, Partridge,
with much earnest Entreaty, prevailed
with Jones to enter, and weather the Storm. 

Hunger is an Enemy (if indeed it may be
called one) which partakes more of the
English than of the French Disposition; for
tho' you subdue this never so often, it will
always rally again in Time; and so it did
with Partridge, who was no sooner arrived
within the Kitchin, than he began to ask
the same Questions which he had asked the
Night before. The Consequence of this
was an excellent cold Chine being produced
upon the Table, upon which not only Partridge,
but Jones himself, made a very
hearty Breakfast, tho' the latter began to
grow again uneasy, as the People of the
House could give him no fresh Information
concerning Sophia. 
Their Meal being over, Jones was again
preparing to sally, notwithstanding the Violence
of the Storm still continued; but Partridge
begged heartily for another Mugg,
and at length casting his Eyes on a Lad at
the Fire, who had entered into the Kitchin,
and who at that Instant was looking as earnestly
at him, he turned suddenly to Jones,
and cried, ‘Master, give me your Hand,
a single Mugg shan't serve the Turn this
Bout. Why here's more News of Madam
Sophia come to Town. The Boy 

there standing by the Fire is the very Lad
that rode before her. I can swear to my
own Plaister on his Face.’ ‘Heavens
bless you, Sir, cries the Boy, it is your
own Plaister sure enough; I shall have
always Reason to remember your Goodness; 
for it hath almost cured me.’ 
At these Words Jones started from his
Chair, and bidding the Boy follow him
immediately, departed from the Kitchin
into a private Apartment; for so delicate
was he with regard to Sophia, that he never
willingly mentioned her Name in the
Presence of many People; and tho' he had,
as it were, from the Overflowings of his
Heart, given Sophia as a Toast among the
Officers, where he thought it was impossible
she should be known; yet even there the Reader
may remember how difficulty he was
prevailed upon to mention her Sir-name. 
Hard therefore was it, and perhaps in the
Opinion of many sagacious Readers, very
absurd and monstrous, that he should principally
owe his present Misfortune to the
supposed Want of that Delicacy with which
he so abounded; for in reality Sophia was
much more offended at the Freedoms which
she thought, and not without good Reason, 

he had taken with her Name and Character,
than at any Freedoms, in which, under his
present Circumstances, he had indulged
himself with the Person of another Woman; 
and to say Truth, I believe Honour
would never have prevailed on her to leave
Upton without seeing her Jones, had it not
been for those two strong Instances of a
Levity in his Behaviour, so void of all Respect,
and indeed so highly inconsistent
with any Degree of Love and Tenderness
in great and delicate Minds. 
But so Matters fell out, and so I must
relate them; and if any Reader is shocked
at their appearing unnatural, I cannot help
it. I must remind such Persons, that I am
not writing a System, but a History, and
I am not obliged to reconcile every Matter
to the received Notions concerning Truth
and Nature. But if this was never so easy
to do, perhaps it might be more prudent in
me to avoid it. For Instance, as the Fact
at present before us now stands, without
any Comment of mine upon it, tho' it may
at first Sight offend some Readers, yet upon
more mature Consideration, it must please
all; for wise and good Men may consider
what happened to Jones at Upton as a just
Punishment for his Wickedness, with Regard 

to Women, of which it was indeed
the immediate Consequence; and silly and
bad persons may comfort themselves in their
Vices, by flattering their own Hearts that the
Characters of Men are rather owing to Accident
than to Virtue. Now perhaps the
Reflections which we should be here inclined
to draw, would alike contradict both
these Conclusions, and would shew that
these Incidents contribute only to confirm
the great, useful and uncommon Doctrine,
which it is the Purpose of this whole Work
to inculcate, and which we must not fill up
our Pages by frequently repeating, as an
ordinary Parson fills his Sermon by repeating
his Text at the End of every Paragraph. 
We are contented that it must appear,
however unhappily Sophia had erred in
her Opinion of Jones, she had sufficient
Reason for her Opinion; since, I believe,
every other young Lady would, in her Situation,
have erred in the same Manner. 
Nay, had she followed her Lover at this
very Time, and had entered this very Alehouse
the Moment he was departed from
it, she would have found the Landlord as
well acquainted with her Name and Person
as the Wench at Upton had appeared to be. 

For while Jones was examining his Boy in
Whispers in an inner Room, Partridge,
who had no such Delicacy in his Disposition,
was in the Kitchin very openly catechising
the other Guide who had attended
Mrs. Fitzpatrick; by which Means the
Landlord, whose Ears were open enough
on all such Occasions, became perfectly well
acquainted with the Tumble of Sophia from
her Horse, &c. with the Mistake concerning
Jenny Cameron, with the many Consequences
of the Punch, and, in short, with
almost every thing which had happened at
the Inn, whence we dispatched our Ladies
in a Coach and Six, when we last took our
Leaves of them. 



Containing little more than a few odd Observations. 
Jones had been absent a full half Hour,
when he returned into the Kitchin in a
Hurry, desiring the Landlord to let him
know that Instant what was to pay. And
now the Concern which Partridge felt at
being obliged to quit a warm Chimney-corner
and a Cup of excellent Liquor, was 

somewhat compensated by hearing that he
was to proceed no farther on Foot; for
Jones, by Golden Arguments, had prevailed
with the Boy to attend him back to the Inn
whither he had before conducted Sophia; 
but to this however the Lad consented,
upon Condition that the other Guide would
wait for him at the Alehouse; because, as
the Landlord at Upton was an intimate Acquaintance
of the Landlord at Gloucester, it
might some Time or other come to the
Ears of the latter, that his Horses had been
let to more than one Person, and so the
Boy might be brought to Account for Money
which he wisely intended to put in his
own Pocket. 
We were obliged to mention this Circumstance,
trifling as it may seem, since it
retarded Mr. Jones a considerable Time in
his setting out; for the Honesty of this latter
Boy was somewhat high—that is, somewhat
high-priced, and would indeed have
cost Jones very dear, had not Partridge,
who, as we have said, was a very cunning
Fellow, artfully thrown in half a Crown to
be spent at that very Alehouse, while the
Boy was waiting for his Companion. This
Half Crown the Landlord no sooner got
Scent of, than he opened after it with such 

vehement and persuasive Outcry, that the
Boy was soon overcome, and consented to
take half a Crown more for his Stay. Here
we cannot help observing, that as there is so
much of Policy in the lowest Life, great
Men often overvalue themselves on those
Refinements in Imposture, in which they
are frequently excelled by some of the lowest
of the Human Species. 
The Horses being now produced, Jones
directly leapt into the Side-Saddle, on
which his dear Sophia had rid. The Lad
indeed very civilly offered him the Use of
his; but he chose the Side-Saddle, probably
because it was softer. Partridge, however,
tho' full as effeminate as Jones, could
not bear the Thoughts of degrading his
Manhood, he therefore accepted the Boy's
offer; and now Jones, being mounted on
the Side-Saddle of his Sophia, the Boy on
that of Mrs. Honour, and Partridge bestriding
the third Horse, they set forwards on
their Journey, and within four Hours arrived
at the Inn where the Reader hath
already spent so much Time. Partridge
was in very high Spirits during the whole
Way, and often mentioned to Jones the
many good Omens of his future Success,
which had lately befriended him; and 

which the Reader, without being the least
superstitious, must allow to have been peculiarly
fortunate. Partridge was moreover
better pleased with the present Pursuit of his
Companion, than he had been with his Pursuit
of Glory; and from these very Omens,
which assured the Pedagogue of Success, he
likewise first acquired a clear Idea of the
Amour between Jones and Sophia; to which
he had before given very little Attention,
as he had originally taken a wrong Scent
concerning the Reasons of Jones's Departure; 
and as to what happened at Upton,
he was too much frightened just before and
after his leaving that Place, to draw any
other Conclusions from thence, than that
Jones was a downright Madman: A
Conceit which was not at all disagreeable
to the Opinion he before had of his extraordinary
Wildness, of which, he thought, his
Behaviour on their quitting Gloucester, so
well justified all the Accounts he had formerly
received. He was now however
pretty well satisfied with his present Expedition,
and henceforth began to conceive
much worthier Sentiments of his Friend's
Understanding. 
The Clock had just struck Three when
they arrived, and Jones immediately bespoke 

Post Horses; but unluckily there
was not a Horse to be procured in the
whole Place; which the Reader will not
wonder at, when he considers the Hurry
in which the whole Nation, and especially
this Part of it, was at this time engaged,
when Expresses were passing and repassing
every Hour of the Day and Night. 
Jones endeavoured all he could to prevail
with his former Guide to escorte him to
Coventry; but he was inexorable. While
he was arguing with the Boy in the Innyard,
a Person came up to him, and saluting
him by his Name, enquired how all the
good Family did in Somersetshire; and now
Jones casting his Eyes upon this Person,
presently discovered him to be Mr. Dowling
the Lawyer, with whom he had dined
at Gloucester, and with much Courtesy returned
his Salutation. 
Dowling very earnestly pressed Mr. Jones
to go no further that Night; and backed
his Solicitations with many unanswerable
Arguments, such as, that it was almost
dark, that the Roads were very dirty, and
that he would be able to travel much better
by Day-light, with many others equally
good, some of which Jones had probably 

suggested to himself before; but as they
were then ineffectual, so they were still,
and he continued resolute in his Design,
even tho' he should be obliged to set out on
Foot. 
When the good Attorney found he
could not prevail on Jones to stay, he as
strenuously applied himself to persuade the
Guide to accompany him. He urged many
Motives to induce him to undertake this
short Journey, and at last concluded with
saying, ‘Do you think the Gentleman
won't very well reward you for your
Trouble?’ 
Two to one are odds at every other
thing, as well as at Foot-ball. But the
Advantage which this united Force hath in
Persuasion or Entreaty, must have been
visible to a curious Observer; for he must
have often seen, that when a Father, a
Master, a Wife, or any other Person in
Authority, have stoutly adhered to a Denial
against all the Reasons which a single
Man could produce, they have afterwards
yielded to the Repetition of the same Sentiments
by a second or third Person, who
hath undertaken the Cause without attempting
to advance any thing new in its Behalf. 

And hence perhaps proceeds the Phrase of
seconding an Argument or a Motion, and
the great Consequence of which this is in all
Assemblies of public Debate. Hence likewise
probably it is, that in our Courts of
Law we often hear a learned Gentleman
(generally a Serjeant) repeating for an Hour
together what another learned Gentleman
who spoke before him had just been saying. 
Instead of accounting for this, we shall
proceed in our usual Manner to exemplify it
in the Conduct of the Lad above-mentioned,
who submitted to the Persuasions of Mr.
Dowling, and promised once more to admit
Jones into his Side-Saddle; but insisted on
first giving the poor Creatures a good Bait,
saying, they had travelled a great Ways,
and been rid very hard. Indeed this Caution
of the Boy was needless; for Jones,
notwithstanding his Hurry and Impatience,
would have ordered this of himself; for he
by no Means agreed with the Opinions of
those who consider Animals as mere Machines,
and when they bury their Spurs in
the Belly of their Horse, imagine the Spur
and the Horse to have an equal Capacity of
feeling Pain. 

While the Beasts were eating their Corn,
or rather were supposed to eat it; (for as
the Boy was taking Care of himself in the
Kitchin, the Ostler took great Care that his
Corn should not be consumed in the Stable)
Mr. Jones, at the earnest Desire of Mr.
Dowling, accompanied that Gentleman into
his Room, where they sat down together
over a Bottle of Wine. 



In which Mr. Jones and Mr. Dowling
drink a Bottle together. 
Mr. Dowling, pouring out a Glass of
Wine, named the Health of the
good Squire Allworthy; adding, ‘If you
please, Sir, we will likewise remember his
Nephew and Heir, the young Squire: 
Come, Sir, here's Mr. Blifil to you, a
very pretty young Gentleman; and who,
I dare swear, will hereafter make a very
considerable Figure in his Country. I
have a Borough for him myself in my
Eye.’ 
‘Sir,’ answered Jones, ‘I am convinced
you don't intend to affront me, so I shall 

not resent it; but, I promise you, you
have joined two Persons very improperly
together; for one is the Glory of the
Human Species, and the other is a Rascal
who dishonours the Name of a
Man.’ 
Dowling stared at this. He said, ‘He
thought both the Gentlemen had a very
unexceptionable Character. As for Squire
Allworthy himself,’ says he, ‘I never had
the Happiness to see him; but all the
World talks of his Goodness. And, indeed,
as to the young Gentleman, I never
saw him but once, when I carried him
the News of the Loss of his Mother; 
and then I was so hurried, and drove, and
tore with the Multiplicity of Business,
that I had hardly Time to converse with
him; but he looked so like a very honest
Gentleman, and behaved himself so prettily,
that I protest I never was more delighted
with any Gentleman since I was
born.’ 
‘I don't wonder,’ answered Jones, ‘that
he should impose upon you in so short
an Acquaintance; for he hath the Cunning
of the Devil himself, and you may
live with him many Years without discovering 

him. I was bred up with him
from my Infancy, and we were hardly
ever asunder; but it is very lately only,
that I have discovered half the Villainy
which is in him. I own I never greatly
liked him. I thought he wanted that
Generosity of Spirit, which is the sure
Foundation of all that is great and noble
in Human Nature. I saw a Selfishness
in him long ago which I despised; 
but it is lately, very lately, that I have
found him capable of the basest and blackest
Designs; for, indeed, I have at last
found out, that he hath taken an Advantage
of the Openness of my own
Temper, and hath concerted the deepest
Project, by a long Train of wicked Artifice,
to work my Ruin, which at last
he hath effected.’ 
‘Ay! ay! cries Dowling, ‘I protest then,
it is a Pity such a Person should inherit
the great Estate of your Uncle Allworthy.’ 
‘Alas, Sir,’ cries Jones, ‘you do me
an Honour to which I have no Title. It
is true, indeed, his Goodness once allowed
me the Liberty of calling him by a
much nearer Name; but as this was a voluntary 

Act of Goodness only, I can complain
of no Injustice when he thinks proper
to deprive me of this Honour; since
the Loss cannot be more unmerited than
the Gift originally was. I assure you,
Sir, I am no Relation of Mr. Allworthy; 
and if the World, who are incapable of
setting a true Value on his Virtue, should
think, in his Behaviour by me, he hath
dealt hardly by a Relation, they do an
Injustice to the best of Men: For
I—but I ask your Pardon, I shall trouble
you with no Particulars relating to
myself; only as you seemed to think me
a Relation of Mr. Allworthy, I thought
proper to set you right in a Matter that
might draw some Censures upon him,
which I promise you I would rather lose
my Life, than give Occasion to.’ 
‘I protest, Sir,’ cried Dowling, you talk
‘very much like a Man of Honour; but
instead of giving me any Trouble, I protest
it would give me great Pleasure to
know how you came to be thought a Relation
of Mr. Allworthy's, if you are not. 
Your Horses won't be ready this half
Hour, and as you have sufficient Opportunity,
I wish you would tell me how
all that happened; for I protest it seems 

very surprizing that you should pass for
a Relation of a Gentleman, without being
so.’ 
Jones, who in the Compliance of his Disposition
(tho' not in his Prudence) a little
resembled his lovely Sophia, was easily prevailed
on to satisfy Mr. Dowling's Curiosity,
by relating the History of his Birth
and Education, which he did, like Othello, 
—even from his boyish Years,
To th' very Moment he was bad to tell;
the which to hear, Dowling, like Desdemona,
did seriously incline; 
He swore 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.
Mr. Dowling was indeed very greatly affected
with this Relation; for he had not
divested himself of Humanity by being an
Attorney. Indeed nothing is more unjust
than to carry our Prejudices against a Profession
into private Life, and to borrow our
Idea of a Man from our Opinion of his
Calling. Habit, it is true, lessens the Horror
of those Actions which the Profession 

makes necessary, and consequently habitual; 
but in all other Instances, Nature works in Men
of all Professions alike; nay, perhaps, even
more strongly with those who give her, as it
were, a Holiday, when they are following
their ordinary Business. A Butcher, I make
no doubt, would feel Compunction at the
Slaughter of a fine Horse; and though a
Surgeon can conceive no Pain in cutting off
a Limb, I have known him compassionate
a Man in a Fit of the Gout. The common
Hangman, who hath stretched the
Necks of Hundreds, is known to have
trembled at his first Operation on a Head: 
And the very Professors of Human Blood,
who in their Trade of War butcher Thousands,
not only of their Fellow Professors,
but often of Women and Children, without
Remorse; even these, I say, in Times
of Peace, when Drums and Trumpets are
laid aside, often lay aside all their Ferocity,
and become very gentle Members of civil
Society. In the same Manner an Attorney
may feel all the Miseries and Distresses of his
Fellow Creatures, provided he happens not
to be concerned against them. 
Jones, as the Reader knows, was yet unacquainted
with the very black Colours in
which he had been represented to Mr. Allworthy; 

and as to other Matters he did not
shew them in the most disadvantageous
Light: For though he was unwilling to
cast any Blame on his former Friend and
Patron, yet he was not very desirous of
heaping too much upon himself. Dowling
therefore observed, and not without Reason,
that very ill Offices must have been done
him by some Body: ‘For certainly,’ cries
he, ‘the Squire would never have disinherited
you only for a few Faults, which
any young Gentleman might have committed. 
Indeed, I cannot properly say
disinherited; for to be sure by Law you
cannot claim as Heir. That's certain; 
that no Body need go to Council for. 
Yet when a Gentleman had in a Manner
adopted you thus as his own Son, you
might reasonably have expected some very
considerable Part, if not the Whole; 
nay, if you had expected the Whole, I
I should not have blamed you: For certainly
every one is for getting as much
as they can, and they are not to be blamed
on that Account.’ 
‘Indeed you wrong me,’ said Jones; 
‘I should have been contented with very
little: I never had any View upon Mr.
Allworthy's Fortune; nay, I believe, I 

may truly say, I never once considered
what he could or might give me. This
I solemnly declare, if he had done a Prejudice
to his Nephew in my Favour, I
would have undone it again. I had rather
enjoy my own Mind than the Fortune
of another Man. What is the poor
Pride arising from a magnificent House,
a numerous Equipage, a splendid Table,
and from all the other Advantages or
Appearances of Fortune, compared to
the warm, solid Content, the swelling Satisfaction,
the thrilling Transports, and
the exulting Triumphs, which a good
Mind enjoys, in the Contemplation of a
generous, virtuous, noble, benevolent
Action? I envy not Blifil in the Prospect
of his Wealth; nor shall I envy
him in the Possession of it. I would not
think myself a Rascal half an Hour,
to exchange Situations. I believe, indeed,
Mr. Blifil suspected me of the
Views you mention; and I suppose these
Suspicions, as they arose from the Baseness
of his own Heart, so they occasioned
his Baseness to me. But, I thank Heaven,
I know, I feel,—I feel my Innocence,
my Friend; and I would not part
with that Feeling for the World. —For
as long as I know I have never done, 

nor even designed an Injury to any Being
whatever, 

Pone me pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor æstiva recreatur aura
Quod latus mundi nebulæ, malusque
  Jupiter urget.
Pone, sub curru nimium propinqui
Solis, in Terra domibus negata;
Dulce ridentem Lalagem  amabo
  Dulce loquentem.’ * 
He then filled a Bumper of Wine, and
drank it off to the Health of his dear Lalage; 
and filling Dowling's Glass likewise
up to the Brim, insisted on his pledging
him. ‘Why then here's Miss Lalage's
Health, with all my Heart,’ cries Dowling. 
‘I have heard her toasted often, I 

protest, though I never saw her; but
they say she's extremely handsome.’ 
Though the Latin was not the only Part
of this Speech which Dowling did not perfectly
understand, yet there was somewhat
in it, that made a very strong Impression
upon him. And though he endeavoured,
by winking, nodding, sneering, and grinning,
to hide the Impression from Jones,
(for we are as often ashamed of thinking
right as of thinking wrong) it is certain he
secretly approved as much of his Sentiments
as he understood, and really felt a very
strong Impulse of Compassion for him. 
But we may possibly take some other Opportunity
of commenting upon this, especially
if we should happen to meet Mr.
Dowling any more in the Course of our
History. At present we are obliged to
take our Leave of that Gentleman a little
abruptly, in Imitation of Mr. Jones; who
was no sooner informed, by Partridge, that
his Horses were ready, than he deposited
his Reckoning, wished his Companion a
good Night, mounted, and set forward towards
Coventry, though the Night was dark,
and it just then began to rain very hard. 




The Disasters which befel Jones on his Departure
for Coventry; with the sage Remarks
of Partridge. 
No Road can be plainer than that from
the Place they now were to Coventry; 
and though neither Jones nor Partridge,
nor the Guide, had ever travelled
it before, it would have been almost impossible
to have missed their Way, had it
not been for the two Reasons mentioned in
the Conclusion of the last Chapter. 
These two Circumstances, however, happening
both unfortunately to intervene, our
Travellers deviated into a much less frequented
Track; and after riding full Six
Miles, instead of arriving at the stately
Spires of Coventry, they found themselves
still in a very dirty Lane, where they saw
no Symptoms of approaching the Suburbs
of a large City. 
Jones now declared that they must certainly
have lost their Way; but this the
Guide insisted upon was impossible; a 

Word which, in common Conversation, is
often used not only to signify improbable, but
often what is really very likely, and, sometimes,
what hath certainly happened: An
hyperbolical Violence like that which is so
frequently offered to the Words Infinite
and Eternal; by the former of which it is
usual to express a Distance of half a Yard; 
and by the latter, a Duration of five Minutes. 
And thus it is as usual to assert the
Impossibility of losing what is already actually
lost. This was, in fact, the Case
at present: For notwithstanding all the confident
Assertions of the Lad to the contrary,
it is certain they were no more in the
right Road to Coventry, than the fraudulent,
griping, cruel, canting Miser is in
the right Road to Heaven. 
It is not, perhaps, easy for a Reader
who hath never been in those Circumstances,
to imagine the Horror with which
Darkness, Rain, and Wind fill Persons who
have lost their Way in the Night; and
who, consequently, have not the pleasant
Prospect of warm Fires, dry Cloaths, and
other Refreshments, to support their Minds
in struggling with the Inclemencies of the
Weather. A very imperfect Idea of this
Horror will, however, serve sufficiently to 

account for the Conceits which now filled
the Head of Partridge, and which we shall
presently be obliged to open. 
Jones grew more and more positive that
they were out of their Road; and the Boy
himself, at last, acknowledged he believed
they were not in the right Road to Coventry; 
tho' he affirmed, at the same Time,
it was impossible they should have mist the
Way. But Partridge was of a different
Opinion. He said, ‘When they first set
out he imagined some Mischief or other
would happen. —Did not you observe,
Sir,’ said he to Jones, ‘that old Woman
who stood at the Door just as you was
taking Horse? I wish you had given her
a small Matter, with all my Heart; for
she said then you might repent it, and at
that very Instant it began to rain, and
the Wind hath continued rising ever
since. Whatever some People may think,
I am very certain it is in the Power of
Witches to raise the Wind whenever they
please. I have seen it happen very often
in my Time: And if ever I saw a Witch
in all my Life, that old Woman was
certainly one. I thought so to myself
at that very Time; and if I had had any
Halfpence in my Pocket, I would have 

given her some: For to be sure it is always
good to be charitable to those Sort
of People, for Fear what may happen; 
and many a Person hath lost his Cattle
by saving a Halfpenny.’ 
Jones, tho' he was horridly vexed at the
Delay which this Mistake was likely to occasion
in his Journey, could not help smiling
at the Superstition of his Friend, whom
an Accident now greatly confirmed in his
Opinion. This was a Tumble from his
Horse; by which, however, he received no
other Injury than what the Dirt conferred
on his Cloaths. 
Partridge had no sooner recovered his
Legs, than he appealed to his Fall, as conclusive
Evidence of all he had asserted: 
But Jones, finding he was unhurt, answered
with a Smile: ‘This Witch of yours, Partridge,
is a most ungrateful Jade, and
doth not, I find, distinguish her Friends
from others in her Resentment. If the
old Lady had been angry with me for
neglecting her, I don't see why she should
tumble you from your Horse, after all
the Respect you have expressed for her.’ 

‘It is ill jesting,’ cries Partridge, ‘with
People who have Power to do these
Things; for they are often very malicious. 
I remember a Farrier, who provoked
one of them, by asking her when
the Time she had bargained with the Devil
for would be out; and within three
Months from that very Day one of his
best Cows was drowned. Nor was she
satisfied with that; for a little Time
afterwards he lost a Barrel of Best-Drink: 
For the old Witch pulled out
the Spicket, and let it run all over the
Cellar, the very first Evening he had
tapped it, to make merry with some of
his Neighbours. In short, nothing ever
thrived with him afterwards; for she worried
the poor Man so, that he took to
Drinking; and in a Year or two his
Stock was seized, and he and his Family
are now come to the Parish.’ 
The Guide, and perhaps his Horse too,
were both so attentive to this Discourse,
that, either thro' Want of Care, or by the
Malice of the Witch, they were now both
sprawling in the Dirt. 

Partridge entirely imputed this Fall, as
he had done his own, to the same Cause. 
He told Mr. Jones, ‘it would certainly be
his Turn next,’ and earnestly intreated
him ‘to return back, and find out the old
Woman, and pacify her. We shall very
soon, added he, reach the Inn: For tho'
we have seemed to go forward, I am very
certain we are in the identical Place in
which we were an Hour ago; and I dare
swear if it was Day-light, we might now
see the Inn we set out from.’ 
Instead of returning any Answer to this
sage Advice, Jones was entirely attentive
to what had happened to the Boy, who received
no other Hurt than what had before
befallen Partridge, and which his Cloaths
very easily bore, as they had been for many
Years inured to the like. He soon regained
his Side-Saddle, and, by the hearty
Curses and Blows which he bestowed on
his Horse, quickly satisfied Mr. Jones that
no Harm was done. 




Relates that Mr. Jones continued his Journey
contrary to the Advice of Partridge, with
what happened on that Occasion. 
They now discovered a Light at
some Distance, to the great Pleasure
of Jones, and to the no small Terror of
Partridge, who firmly believed himself to
be bewitched, and that this Light was a
Jack with a Lanthorn, or somewhat more
mischievous. 
But how were these Fears increased,
when, as they approached nearer to this
Light, (or Lights as they now appeared)
they heard a confused Sound of
Human Voices; of singing, laughing,
and hallowing, together with a strange
Noise that seemed to proceed from some
Instruments; but could hardly be allowed
the Name of Music. Indeed, to favour
a little the Opinion of Partridge, it might
very well be called Music bewitched. 
It is impossible to conceive a much greater
Degree of Horror than what now seized 

on Partridge; the Contagion of which had
reached the Post-boy; who had been very
attentive to many Things that the other had
uttered. He now therefore joined in petitioning
Jones to return; saying he firmly
believed what Partridge had just before
said, that tho' the Horses seemed to go on,
they had not moved a Step forwards during
at least the last half Hour. 
Jones could not help smiling in the midst
of his Vexation, at the Fears of these
poor Fellows. ‘Either we advance,’ says
he, ‘towards the Lights, or the Lights
have advanced towards us; for we are
now at a very little Distance from them; 
but how can either of you be afraid of
a Set of People who appear only to be
merry-making?’ 
‘Merry-making, Sir!’ cries Partridge,
‘who could be merry-making at this Time
of Night, and in such a Place, and such
Weather? They can be nothing but
Ghosts or Witches, or some Evil Spirits
or other, that's certain.’ 
‘Let them be what they will,’ cries
Jones, ‘I am resolved to go up to them,
and enquire the Way to Coventry. All 

Witches, Partridge, are not such ill-natured
Hags, as that we had the Misfortune
to meet with last.’ 
‘Oh Lord, Sir!’ cries Partridge, ‘there
is no knowing what Humour they will
be in; to be sure it is always best to be
civil to them; but what if we should
meet with something worse than Witches,
with Evil Spirits themselves—Pray, Sir,
be advised; pray, Sir, do. If you had
read so many terrible Accounts as I have
of these Matters, you would not be so
Fool-hardy—The Lord knows whither we
have got already, or whither we are going: 
For sure such Darkness was never
seen upon Earth, and I question whether
it can be darker in the other World.’ 
Jones put forwards as fast as he could,
notwithstanding all these Hints and Cautions,
and poor Partridge was obliged to
follow: For tho' he hardly dared advance,
he dared still less to stay behind by himself. 
At length they arrived at the Place
whence the Lights and different Noises had
issued. This Jones perceived to be no other
than a Barn where a great Number of Men
and Women were assembled, and were diverting 

themselves with much apparent Jollity. 
Jones no sooner appeared before the great
Doors of the Barn, which were open, than
a masculine and very rough Voice from
within demanded who was there? —To
which Jones gently answered, A Friend; 
and immediately asked the Road to Coventry. 
‘If you are a Friend,’ cries another of
the Men in the Barn, ‘you had better alight
till the Storm is over (for indeed
it was now more violent than ever), ‘you
are very welcome to put up your Horse,
for there is sufficient Room for him at one
End of the Barn.’ 
‘You are very obliging, returned Jones; 
and I will accept your Offer for a few
Minutes, whilst the Rain continues; and
here are two more who will be glad of
the same Favour.’ This was accorded
with more Good-will than it was accepted: 
For Partridge would rather have submitted
to the utmost Inclemency of the
Weather, than have trusted to the Clemency
of those whom he took for Hobgoblins; 
and the poor Post-boy was now 

infected with the same Apprehensions; 
but they were both obliged to follow the
Example of Jones; the one because he
durst not leave his Horse, and the other
because he feared nothing so much as being
left by himself. 
Had this History been writ in the Days
of Superstition, I should have had too
much Compassion for the Reader to have
left him so long in Suspence, whether Beelzebub
or Satan was about actually to appear
in Person, with all his Hellish Retinue; 
but as these Doctrines are at present
very unfortunate, and have but few if any Believers,
I have not been much aware of
conveying any such Terrors. To say Truth,
the whole Furniture of the infernal Regions
hath long been appropriated by the
Managers of Playhouses, who seem lately
to have lain them by as Rubbish, capable
only of affecting the Upper Gallery; a
Place in which few of our Readers ever
sit. 
However, tho' we do not suspect raising
any great Terror on this Occasion, we have
Reason to fear some other Apprehensions
may here arise in our Reader, into which
we would not willingly betray him, I mean 

that we are going to take a Voyage into
Fairy Land, and to introduce a Set of Beings
into our History, which scarce any one
was ever childish enough to believe, tho'
many have been foolish enough to spend
their Time in writing and reading their
Adventures. 
To prevent therefore any such Suspicions,
so prejudicial to the Credit of an Historian,
who professes to draw his Materials from
Nature only, we shall now proceed to acquaint
the Reader who these People were,
whose sudden Appearance had struck such
Terrors into Partridge, had more than half
frightened the Post-Boy, and had a little
surprized even Mr. Jones himself. 
The People then assembled in this Barn
were no other than a Company of Egyptians,
or as they are vulgarly called Gypsies,
and they were now celebrating the Wedding
of one of their Society. 
It is impossible to conceive a happier
Set of People than appeared here to be met
together. The utmost Mirth indeed shewed
itself in every Countenance; nor was
their Ball totally void of all Order and Decorum. 
Perhaps it had more than a Country 

Assembly is sometimes conducted with: 
For these People are subject to a formal
Government and Laws of their own, and
all pay Obedience to one great Magistrate
whom they call their King. 
Greater Plenty likewise was no where to
be seen, than what flourished in this Barn. 
Here was indeed no Nicety nor Elegance,
nor did the keen Appetite of the Guests require
any. Here was good Store of Bacon,
Fowls, and Mutton, to which every one
present provided better Sauce himself, than
the best and dearest French Cook can prepare. 
Æneas is not described under more Consternation
in the Temple of Juno, 

Dum stupet obtutuq; hæret defixus in uno.
than was our Heroe at what he saw in
this Barn. While he was looking every
where round him with Astonishment, a venerable
Person approached him with many
friendly Salutations, rather of too hearty
a Kind to be called courtly. This was no
other than the King of the Gypsies himself. 
He was very little distinguished in Dress
from his Subjects, nor had he any Regalia of 

Majesty to support his Dignity; and yet
there seemed (as Mr. Jones said) to be
somewhat in his Air which denoted Authority,
and inspired the Beholders with an
Idea of Awe and Respect; tho' all this
was perhaps imaginary in Jones, and the
Truth may be, that such Ideas are incident
to Power, and almost inseparable from it. 
There was somewhat in the open Countenance
and courteous Behaviour of Jones,
which being accompanied with much Comeliness
of Person, greatly recommended him
at first Sight to every Beholder. These
were perhaps a little heightened in the present
Instance, by that profound Respect
which he paid to the King of the Gypsies,
the Moment he was acquainted with his
Dignity, and which was the sweeter to his
Gypseian Majesty, as he was not used to receive
such Homage from any but his own
Subjects. 
The King ordered a Table to be spread
with the choicest of their Provisions for his
Accommodation, and having placed himself
at his Right Hand, his Majesty began
to discourse our Heroe in the following Manner: 

‘Me doubt not, Sir, but you have often
seen some of my People, who are what you
call de Parties detache: For dey go about
every where; but me fancy you imagine
not we be so considrable Body as we be,
and may be you will surprise more, when
you hear de Gypsy be as orderly and
well govern People as any upon Face
of de Earth. 
‘Me have Honour, as me say, to be
deir King, and no Monarch can do boast
of more dutiful Subject, ne no more affectionate. 
How far me deserve deir
Goodwill, me no say, but dis me can
say, dat me never design any Ting but
to do dem Good. Me sall no do boast
of dat neider: For what can me do oderwise
dan consider of de Good of dose
poor People who go about all Day to
give me always de best of what dey get. 
Dey love and honour me darefore, because
me do love and take Care of dem; 
dat is all, me know no oder Reason. 
‘About a tousand or two tousand Year ago,
me cannot tell to a Year or two, as can
neider write nor read, there was a great
what you call,—a Volution among de 

Gypsy; for dere was de Lord Gypsy in
dose Days; and dese Lord did quarrel
vid one anoder about de Place; but de
King of de Gypsy did demolish dem all,
and made all his Subject equal vid each
oder; and since dat time dey have agree
very well: for dey no tink of being
King, and may be it be better for dem
as dey be: For me assure you it be ver
troublesome ting to be King, and always
to do Justice; me have often wish to be
de private Gypsy when me have been
forced to punish my dear Friend and Relation; 
for dough we never put to Death,
our Punishments be ver severe. Dey
make de Gypsy ashamed of demselves,
and dat be ver terrible Punishment; me
ave scarce ever known de Gypsy so punish
do Harm any more.’ 
The King then proceeded to express some
Wonder that there was no such Punishment
as Shame in other Governments. Upon
which Jones assured him to the contrary: 
For that there were many Crimes for which
Shame was inflicted by the English Laws,
and that it was indeed one Consequence of
all Punishment. ‘Dat be ver strange,’ 
said the King: ‘For me know and hears
good deal of your People, dough me no 

live among dem, and me ave often hear
dat Sham is de Consequence and de Cause
too of many your Rewards. Are your
Rewards and Punishments den de same
Ting? 
While his Majesty was thus discoursing
with Jones, a sudden Uproar arose in the
Barn, and as it seems, upon this Occasion: 
The Curtesy of these People had by Degrees
removed all the Apprehensions of
Partridge, and he was prevailed upon not
only to stuff himself with their Food, but
to taste some of their Liquors, which by
Degrees entirely expelled all Fear from
his Composition, and in its Stead introduced
much more agreeable Sensations. 
A young Female Gypsy, more remarkable
for her Wit than her Beauty, had decoyed
the honest Fellow aside, pretending to tell
his Fortune. Now when they were alone
together in a remote Part of the Barn, whether
it proceeded from the strong Liquor,
which is never so apt to inflame inordinate
Desire as after moderate Fatigue, or whether
the fair Gypsy herself threw aside the Delicacy
and Decency of her Sex, and tempted the
Youth Partridge with express Solicitations; 
but they were discovered in a very improper 

Manner by the Husband of the Gypsy,
who from Jealousy, it seems, had kept a
watchful Eye over his Wife, and had dogged
her to the Place, where he found her
in the Arms of her Gallant. 
To the great Confusion of Jones, Partridge
was now hurried before the King; 
who heard the Accusation, and likewise the
Culprit's Defence, which was indeed very
trifling: For the poor Fellow was confounded
by the plain Evidence which appeared
against him, and had very little to
say for himself. His Majesty then turning
towards Jones, said, ‘Sir, you have hear
what dey say, what Punishment do you
tink your Man deserve?’ 
Jones answered, ‘He was sorry for what
had happened, and that Partridge should
make the Husband all the Amends in his
Power: He said, he had very little Money
about him at that Time, and putting his
Hand into his Pocket, offered the Fellow
a Guinea.’ To which he immediately answered,
‘He hoped his Honour would not
think of giving him less than five.’ 
This Sum after some Altercation was reduced
to two, and Jones having stipulated 

for the full Forgiveness of both Partridge
and the Wife, was going to pay the Money; 
when his Majesty restraining his
Hand, turned to the Witness, and asked
him, ‘At what Time he had first discovered
the Criminals?’ To which he answered,
‘That he had been desired by the Husband
to watch the Motions of his Wife
from her first speaking to the Stranger,
and that he had never lost Sight of her
afterwards till the Crime had been committed.’ 
The King then asked, ‘If the
Husband was with him all that Time in
his lurking Place?’ To which he answered
in the Affirmative. His Egyptian Majesty
then addressed himself to the Husband as
follows, ‘Me be sorry to see any Gypsy
dat have no more Honour dan to sell de
Honour of his Wife for Money. If you
had had de Love for your Wife, you
would have prevented dis Matter, and
not endeavour to make her de Whore
dat you might discover her. Me do order
dat you have no Money given you,
for you deserve Punishment not Reward; 
me do order derefore, dat you be de infamous
Gypsy, and do wear Pair of Horns
upon your Forehead for one Month, and
dat your Wife be called de Whore, and
pointed at all dat Time: For you be 

de infamous Gypsy, but she be no less de
infamous Whore.’ 
The Gypsies immediately proceeded to
execute the Sentence, and left Jones and
Partridge alone with his Majesty. 
Jones greatly applauded the Justice of
the Sentence; upon which the King turning
to him said, ‘Me believe you be surprize: 
For me suppose you have ver bad
Opinion of my People; me suppose you
thing us all de Tieves.’ 
‘I must confess, Sir,’ said Jones, ‘I
have not heard so favourable an Account
of them as they seem to deserve.’ 
‘Me vil tell you,’ said the King, ‘how
the Difference is between you and us. 
My People rob your People, and your
People rob one anoder.’ 
Jones afterwards proceeded very gravely
to sing forth the Happiness of those Subjects
who lived under such a Magistrate. 
Indeed their Happiness appears to have
been so compleat, that we are aware lest some
Advocate for arbitrary Power should hereafter
quote the Case of those People, as an 

Instance of the great Advantages which attend
that Government above all others. 
And here we will make a Concession,
which would not perhaps have been expected
from us, That no limited Form of
Government is capable of rising to the
same Degree of Perfection, or of producing
the same Benefits to Society with this. 
Mankind have never been so happy, as
when the greatest Part of the then known
World was under the Dominion of a single
Master; and this State of their Felicity continued
during the Reigns of five successive
Princes * . This was the true Æra of the
Golden Age, and the only Golden Age
which ever had any Existence, unless in
the warm Imaginations of the Poets, from
the Expulsion from Eden down to this Day. 
In reality, I know but of one solid Objection
to absolute Monarchy. The only
Defect in which excellent Constitution seems
ro be the Difficulty of finding any Man
adequate to the Office of an absolute Monarch: 
For this indispensably requires three
Qualities very difficult, as it appears from
History, to be found in princely Natures: 
First, a sufficient Quantity of Moderation
in the Prince, to be contented with all the 

Power which is possible for him to have. 
2dly, Enough of Wisdom to know his
own Happiness. And, 3dly, Goodness
sufficient to support the Happiness of others,
when not only compatible with, but
instrumental to his own. 
Now if an absolute Monarch with all
these great and rare Qualifications should
be allowed capable of conferring the greatest
Good on Society, it must be surely
granted, on the contrary, that absolute
Power vested in the Hands of one who is
deficient in them all, is likely to be attended
with no less a Degree of Evil. 
In short our own Religion furnishes us
with adequate Ideas of the Blessing, as well
as Curse which may attend absolute Power. 
The Pictures of Heaven and of Hell will
place a very lively Image of both before
our Eyes: For though the Prince of the
latter can have no Power, but what he
originally derives from the omnipotent Sovereign
in the former; yet it plainly appears
from Scripture, that absolute Power
in his infernal Dominions is granted to
their Diabolical Ruler. This is indeed the
only absolute Power which can by Scripture
be derived from Heaven. If therefore 

the several Tyrannies upon Earth can
prove any Title to a divine Authority, it
must be derived from this original Grant
to the Prince of Darkness, and these subordinate
Deputations must consequently come
immediately from him whose Stamp they so
expressly bear. 
To conclude, as the Examples of all
Ages shew us that Mankind in general desire
Power only to do Harm, and when
they obtain it, use it for no other Purpose; 
it is not consonant with even the least Degree
of Prudence to hazard an Alternative, 
where our Hopes are poorly kept in
Countenance by only two or three Exceptions
out of a thousand Instances to alarm
our Fears. In this Case it will be much
wiser to submit to a few Inconveniences arising
from the dispassionate Deafness of
Laws, than to remedy them by applying
to the passionate open Ears of a Tyrant. 
Nor can the Example of the Gypsies, tho'
possibly they may have long been happy under
this Form of Government, be here urged; 
since we must remember the very material
Respect in which they differ from all other
People, and to which perhaps this their
Happiness is entirely owing, namely, that
they have no false Honours among them; 

and that they look on Shame as the most
grievous Punishment in the World. 



A Dialogue between Jones and Partridge. 
The honest Lovers of Liberty will
we doubt not pardon that long Digression
into which we were led at the Close
of the last Chapter, to prevent our History
from being applied to the Use of the most
pernicious Doctrine, which Priestcraft had
ever the Wickedness or the Impudence to
preach. 
We will now proceed with Mr. Jones,
who when the Storm was over, took Leave
of his Egyptian Majesty, after many Thanks
for his courteous Behaviour and kind Entertainment,
and set out for Coventry; to
which Place (for it was still dark) a Gypsy
was ordered to conduct him. 
Jones having, by Reason of his Deviation,
travelled eleven Miles instead of six,
and most of those through very execrable
Roads, where no Expedition could have
been made, in Quest of a Midwife, did not
arrive at Coventry till near Twelve. Nor 

could he possibly get again into the Saddle
till past Two; for Post-Horses were now
not easy to get; nor were the Hostler or
Post-Boy, in half so great a Hurry as himself,
but chose rather to imitate the tranquil
Disposition of Partridge; who being
denied the Nourishment of Sleep, took all
Opportunities to supply its Place with every
other Kind of Nourishment, and was never
better pleased than when he arrived at an
Inn, nor ever more dissatisfied than when he
was again forced to leave it. 
Jones now travelled Post; we will
follow him therefore, according to our
Custom, and to the Rules of Longinus, in
the same Manner. From Coventry he arrived
at Daventry, from Daventry at Stratford,
and from Stratford at Dunstable, whither
he came the next Day a little after Noon,
and within a few Hours after Sophia had left
it; and though he was obliged to stay here
longer than he wished, while a Smith, with
great Deliberation, shoed the Post-Horse
he was to ride, he doubted not but to overtake
his Sophia before she should set out
from St. Albans; at which Place he concluded,
and very reasonably, that his Lordship
would stop and dine. 

And had he been right in this Conjecture,
he most probably would have overtaken his
Angel at the aforesaid Place; but unluckily
my Lord had appointed a Dinner to be
prepared for him at his own House in London,
and in order to enable him to reach
that Place in proper Time, he had ordered
a Relay of Horses to meet him at St. Albans. 
When Jones therefore arrived there,
he was informed that the Coach and Six had
set out two Hours before. 
If fresh Post-Horses had been now ready,
as they were not, it seemed so apparently
impossible to overtake the Coach before it
reached London, that Partridge thought he
had now a proper Opportunity to remind
his Friend of a Matter which he seemed
entirely to have forgotten; what this was
the Reader will guess, when we inform him
that Jones had eat nothing more than one
poached Egg since he had left the Alehouse
where he had first met the Guide returning
from Sophia; for with the Gypsies,
he had only feasted his Understanding. 
The Landlord so entirely agreed with the
Opinion of Mr. Partridge, that he no sooner
heard the latter desire his Friend to stay
and dine, than he very readily put in his 

Word, and retracting his Promise before
given of furnishing the Horses immediately,
he assured Mr. Jones he would lose no Time
in bespeaking a Dinner, which, he said,
could be got ready sooner than it was possible
to get the Horses up from Grass, and
to prepare them for their Journey by a Feed
of Corn. 
Jones was at length prevailed on, chiefly
by the latter Argument of the Landlord; 
and now a Joint of Mutton was put down
to the Fire. While this was preparing, Partridge
being admitted into the same Apartment
with his Friend or Master, began to
harangue in the following Manner. 
‘Certainly, Sir, if ever Man deserved a
young Lady, you deserve young Madam
Western; for what a vast Quantity of
Love must a Man have, to be able to live
upon it without any other Food, as you
do. I am positive I have eat thirty times
as much within these last twenty-four
Hours as your Honour, and yet I am almost
famished; for nothing makes a Man
so hungry as travelling, especially in this
cold raw Weather. And yet I can't tell
how it is, but your Honour is seemingly
in perfect good Health, and you never 

looked better nor fresher in your Life. It
must be certainly Love that you live
upon.’ 
‘And a very rich Diet too, Partridge.’ 
answered Jones. ‘But did not Fortune
send me an excellent Dainty Yesterday? 
Dost thou imagine I cannot live more
than twenty-four Hours on this dear
Pocket-Book?’ 
‘Undoubtedly,’ cries Partridge, ‘there
is enough in that Pocket-book to purchase
many a good Meal. Fortune sent it to
your Honour very opportunely for present
Use, as your Honour's Money must
be almost out by this Time.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ answered Jones; 
I hope you don't imagine I should be dishonest
enough, even if it belonged to any
other Person, besides Miss Western—’ 
‘Dishonest!’ replied Partridge; ‘Heaven
forbid I should wrong your Honour
so much; but where's the Dishonesty in
borrowing a little for present spending,
since you will be so well able to pay the
Lady hereafter. No indeed, I would
have your Honour pay it again, as soon 

as it is convenient, by all Means; but
where can be the Harm in making use of
it now you want it. Indeed if it belonged
to a poor Body, it would be another
thing; but so great a Lady to be sure can
never want it, especially now as she is
along with a Lord, who it can't be
doubted will let her have whatever she
hath Need of. Besides, if she should want
a little, she can't want the whole, therefore
I would give her a little; but I would be
hanged before I mentioned the having
found it at first, and before I got some
Money of my own; for London, I have
heard, is the very worst of Places to be
in without Money. Indeed, if I had not
known to whom it belonged, I might
have thought it was the Devil's Money,
and have been afraid to use it; but as
you know otherwise, and came honestly
by it, it would be an Affront to Fortune
to part with it all again, at the very
Time when you want it most; you can
hardly expect she should ever do you such
another good Turn; for Fortuna nunquam
perpetuo est bona. You will do as
you please, notwithstanding all I say; but
for my Part, I would be hanged before I
mentioned a Word of the Matter.’ 

‘By what I can see, Partridge,’ cries
Jones, ‘hanging is a Matter non longe alienum
à Scævolæ studiis.’ ‘You should say
alienus,’ says Partridge—I remember the
Passage; it is an Example under Communis,
Alienus, immunis, variis casibus serviunt.’ 
If you do remember it,’ cries
Jones, ‘I find you don't understand it; 
but I tell thee, Friend, in plain English,
that he who finds another's Property,
and wilfully detains it from the
known Owner, deserves in Foro Conscientiæ,
to be hanged no less than if he had
stolen it. And as for this very identical
Bill, which is the Property of my Angel,
and was once in her dear Possession, I
will not deliver it into any Hands but her
own, upon any Consideration whatever; 
No, tho' I was as hungry as thou art,
and had no other Means to satisfy my
craving Appetite; this I hope to do before
I sleep; but if it should happen
otherwise, I charge thee, if thou wouldst
not incur my Displeasure for ever, not to
shock me any more by the bare Mention
of such detestable Baseness.’ 
‘I should not have mentioned it now,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘if it had appeared so to 

me; for I'm sure I scorn any Wickedness
as much as another; but perhaps you
know better; and yet I might have imagined
that I should not have lived so
many Years, and have taught School so
long, without being able to distinguish
between Fas & Nefas; but it seems we
are to live and learn. I remember my
old Schoolmaster, who was a prodigious
great Scholar, used often to say, Polly
Matete cry Town is my Daskalon. The
English of which, he told us, was, That a
Child may sometimes teach his Grandmother
to suck Eggs. I have lived to a fine
Purpose truly, if I am to be taught my
Grammar at this Time of Day. Perhaps,
young Gentleman, you may change your
Opinion if you live to my Years: For
I remember I thought myself as wise
when I was a Stripling of one or two and
twenty as I am now. I am sure I always
taught alienus, and my Master read it so
before me.’ 
There were not many Instances in which
Partridge could provoke Jones, nor were
there many in which Partridge himself
could have been hurried out of his Respect. 
Unluckily however they had both hit on one
of these. We have already seen Partridge 

could not bear to have his Learning attacked,
nor could Jones bear some Passage
or other in the foregoing Speech. And
now looking upon his Companion with a
contemptuous and disdainful Air (a thing
not usual with him) he cried, ‘Partridge,
I see thou art a conceited old Fool, and I
wish thou art not likewise an old Rogue. 
Indeed if I was as well convinced of the
the latter as I am of the former, thou
shouldst travel no farther in my Company.’ 
The sage Pedagogue was contented with
the Vent which he had already given to his
Indignation; and, as the vulgar Phrase is,
immediately drew in his Horns. He said,
He was sorry he had uttered any thing
which might give Offence, for that he had
never intended it; but Nemo omnibus boris
sapit. 
As Jones had the Vices of a warm Disposition,
he was entirely free from those of
a cold one; and if his Friends must have
confest his Temper to have been a little too
easily ruffled, his Enemies must at the same
Time have confest, that it as soon subsided; 
nor did it at all resemble the Sea, whose
Swelling is more violent and dangerous after 

a Storm is over, than while the Storm
itself subsists. He instantly accepted the
Submission of Partridge, shook him by the
Hand, and with the most benign Aspect
imaginable, said twenty kind Things, and
at the same Time very severely condemned
himself, tho' not half so severely as he will
most probably be condemned by many of
our good Readers. 
Partridge was now highly comforted, as
his Fears of having offended were at once
abolished, and his Pride completely satisfied
by Jones having owned himself in the
wrong, which Submission he instantly applied
to what had principally nettled him,
and repeated, in a muttering Voice, ‘To
be sure, Sir, your Knowledge may be
superior to mine in some Things; but as
to the Grammar, I think I may challenge
any Man living. I think, at least, I have
that at my Finger's End.’ 
If any thing could add to the Satisfaction
which the poor Man now enjoyed, he received
this Addition by the Arrival of an
excellent Shoulder of Mutton, that at this
Instant came smoaking to the Table. On
which, having both plentifully feasted, they 

again mounted their Horses, and set forward
for London. 



What happened to Mr. Jones in his Journey
from St. Albans. 
They were got about two Miles beyond
Barnett, and it was now the
Dusk of the Evening, when a genteel looking
Man, but upon a very shabby Horse,
rode up to Jones, and asked him whether
he was going to London, to which
Jones answered in the affirmative. The
Gentleman replied, ‘I should be obliged
to you, Sir, if you will accept of my
Company; for it is very late, and I am
a Stranger to the Road.’ Jones readily
complied with the Request; and on they
travelled together, holding that Sort of
Discourse which is usual on such Occasions. 
Of this, indeed, Robbery was the principal
Topic; upon which Subject the Stranger
expressed great Apprehensions; but
Jones declared he had very little to lose,
and consequently as little to fear. Here
Partridge could not forbear putting in his
Word. ‘Your Honour,’ said he, ‘may 

think it a little, but I am sure, if I had a
hundred Pound Bank Note in my
Pocket, as you have, I should be very
sorry to lose it; but, for my Part, I never
was less afraid in my Life; for we
are four of us, and if we all stand by one
another, the best Man in England can't
rob us. Suppose he should have a Pistol,
he can kill but one of us, and a Man can
die but once, that's my Comfort, a Man
can die but once.’ 
Besides the Reliance on superior Numbers,
a kind of Valour which hath raised a certain
Nation among the Moderns to a high
Pitch of Glory, there was another Reason
for the extraordinary Courage which Partridge
now discovered; for he had at present
as much of that Quality as was in the
Power of Liquor to bestow. 
Our Company were now arrived within a
Mile of Highgate, when the Stranger turned
short upon Jones, and pulling out a Pistol,
demanded that little Bank Note which Partridge
had mentioned. 
Jones was at first somewhat shocked at
this unexpected Demand; however, he presently
recollected himself, and told the 

Highwayman, all the Money he had in his
Pocket was entirely at his Service; and so
saying, he pulled out upwards of three Guineas,
and offered to deliver it; but the
other answered with an Oath, That would
not do. Jones answered coolly, He was
very sorry for it, and returned the Money
into his Pocket. 
The Highwayman then threatned, if he
did not deliver the Bank Note that Moment,
he must shoot him; holding his Pistol at
the same Time very near to his Breast. 
Jones instantly caught hold of the Fellow's
Hand, which trembled so that he could
scarce hold the Pistol in it, and turned the
Muzzle from him. A Struggle then ensued,
in which the former wrested the Pistol from
the Hand of his Antagonist, and both came
from their Horses on the Ground together,
the Highwayman upon his Back, and the
victorious Jones upon him. 
The poor Fellow now began to implore
Mercy of the Conqueror; for, to say the
Truth, he was in Strength by no Means a
Match for Jones. ‘Indeed, Sir,’ says he,
‘I could have had no Intention to shoot
you, for you will find the Pistol was not
loaded. This is the first Robbery I ever 

attempted, and I have been driven by
Distress to this.’ 
At this Instant, at about an hundred and
fifty Yards Distance, lay another Person on
the Ground, roaring for Mercy in a much
louder Voice than the Highwayman. This
was no other than Partridge himself, who
endeavouring to make his Escape from the
Engagement, had been thrown from his
Horse, and lay flat on his Face, not daring
to look up, and expecting every Minute to
be shot. 
In this Posture he lay, till the Guide,
who was no otherwise concerned than for his
Horses, having secured the stumbling Beast,
came up to him and told him, his Master
had got the better of the Highwayman. 
Partridge leapt up at this News, and ran
back to the Place, where Jones stood with
his Sword drawn in his Hand to guard the
poor Fellow; which Partridge no sooner
saw, than he cried out, ‘Kill the Villain,
Sir, run him through the Body, kill him
this Instant.’ 
Luckily however for the poor Wretch he
had fallen into more merciful Hands; for 

Jones having examined the Pistol, and
found it to be really unloaded, began to believe
all the Man had told him before Partridge
came up; namely, that he was a
Novice in the Trade, and that he had been
driven to it by the Distress he mentioned,
the greatest indeed imaginable, that of five
hungry Children, and a Wife lying in of a
sixth, in the utmost Want and Misery. 
The Truth of all which the Highwayman
most vehemently asserted, and offered to
convince Mr. Jones of, if he would take the
Trouble to go to his House, which was not
above two Miles off; saying, ‘That he
desired no Favour, but upon Condition
of proving all he had alledged.’ 
Jones at first pretended that he would
take the Fellow at his Word, and return
with him, declaring that his Fate should
depend entirely on the Truth of his Story. 
Upon this the poor Fellow immediately expressed
so much Alacrity, that Jones was perfectly
satisfied with his Veracity, and began
now to entertain Sentiments of Compassion
for him. He returned the Fellow his
empty Pistol, advised him to think of honester
Means of relieving his Distress, and
gave him a couple of Guineas for the immediate 

Support of his Wife and his Family; 
adding, ‘he wished he had more for
his Sake, but the hundred Pound that had
been mentioned, was not his own.’ 
Our Readers will probably be divided
in their Opinions concerning this Action; 
some may applaud it perhaps as an Act of
extraordinary Humanity, while those of a
more saturnine Temper will consider it as a
Want of Regard to that Justice which
every Man owes his Country. Partridge
certainly saw it in that Light; for he testified
much Dissatisfaction on the Occasion,
quoted an old Proverb, and said, He
should not wonder if the Rogue attacked
them again before they reached London. 
The Highwayman was full of Expressions
of Thankfulness and Gratitude. He
actually dropt Tears, or pretended so to
do. He vowed he would immediately return
home, and would never afterwards
commit such a Transgression; whether he
kept his Word or no, perhaps may appear
hereafter. 
Our Travellers having remounted their
Horses, arrived in Town without encountering
any new Mishap. On the Road
much pleasant Discourse passed between 

Jones and Partridge, on the Subject of
their last Adventure. In which Jones exprest
a great Compassion for those Highwaymen
who are, by unavoidable Distress,
driven, as it were, to such illegal Courses,
as generally bring them to a shameful
Death. ‘I mean,’ said he, ‘those only
whose highest Guilt extends no farther
than to Robbery, and who are never
guilty of Cruelty nor Insult to any Person,
which is a Circumstance that, I must say,
to the Honour of our Country, distinguishes
the Robbers of England from those
of all other Nations; for Murder is,
amongst those, almost inseparably incident
to Robbery.’ 
‘No doubt,’ answered Partridge, ‘it is
better to take away one's Money than
one's Life, and yet it is very hard upon
honest Men, that they can't travel about
their Business without being in Danger of
these Villains. And to be sure it would be
better that all Rogues were hanged out of
the Way, than that one honest Man should
suffer. For my own Part, indeed, I
should not care to have the Blood of any
of them on my own Hands; but it is
very proper for the Law to hang them
all. What Right hath any Man to take 

Sixpence from me, unless I give it him? 
Is there any Honesty in such a Man?’ 
‘No surely,’ cries Jones, ‘no more
than there is in him who takes the Horses
out of another Man's Stable, or who applies
to his own Use the Money which
he finds, when he knows the right
Owner.’ 
These Hints stopt the Mouth of Partridge,
nor did he open it again till Jones
having thrown some sarcastical Jokes on his
Cowardice, he offered to excuse himself on
the Inequality of Fire Arms, saying, ‘A
thousand naked Men are nothing to one
Pistol; for though, it is true, it will kill
but one at a single Discharge, yet who
can tell but that one may be himself.’ 