


Adventures in the Person of a Monk. 
‘Fortune now placed me in the Character
of a younger Brother of a good
House, and I was in my Youth sent to School; 
but Learning was now at so low an Ebb,
that my Master himself could hardly construe
a Sentence of Latin; and as for Greek, he
could not read it. With very little Knowledge
therefore, and with altogether as little
Virtue, I was set apart for the Church,
and at the proper Age commenced Monk. 
I lived many Years retired in a Cell, a Life
very agreeable to the Gloominess of my Temper,
which was much inclined to despise
the World; that is, in other Words, to envy
all Men of superiour Fortune and Qualifications,
and in general, to hate and detest
the human Species. Notwithstanding which,
I could, on proper Occasions, submit to
flatter the vilest Fellow in Nature, which I
did one Stephen an Eunuch, a Favourite of
the Emperor Justinian II. one of the
wickedest Wretches whom perhaps the 

World ever saw. I not only wrote a Panegyric
on this Man, but I commended him
as a Pattern to all others in my Sermons,
by which means I so greatly ingratiated my
self with him, that he introduced me to the
Emperor's Presence, where I prevailed so
far by the same Methods, that I was shortly
taken from my Cell, and preferred to a
Place at Court. I was no sooner established
in the Favour of Justinian, than I prompted
him to all kind of Cruelty. As I was
of a four morose Temper, and hated nothing
more than the Symptoms of Happiness
appearing in any Countenance, I represented
all kind of Diversion and Amusement
as the most horrid Sins. I inveighed against
Chearfulness as Levity, and encouraged nothing
but Gravity, or, to confess the Truth
to you, Hypocrisy. The unhappy Emperor
followed my Advice, and incensed the People
by such repeated Barbarities, that he was at
last deposed by them and banished. 
‘I Now retired again to my Cell, (for
Historians mistake in saying I was put to
death) where I remained safe from the Danger
of the irritated Mob, whom I cursed in my 

own Heart, as much as they could curse
me. 
‘Justinian, after three Years of his Banishment,
returned to Constantinople in disguise,
and paid me a Visit. I at first affected
not to know him, and without the least
Compunction of Gratitude for his former Favours,
intended not to receive him, till a
Thought immediately suggesting it self to
me, how I might convert him to my Advantage,
I pretended to recollect him; and
blaming the shortness of my Memory and
badness of my Eyes, I sprung forward and
embraced him with great Affection. 
‘My Design was to betray him to Apsimar,
who, I doubted not, would generously reward
such a Service. I therefore very earnestly
requested him to spend the whole
Evening with me; to which he consented. 
I formed an Excuse for leaving him a few
Minutes, and ran away to the Palace to
acquaint Apsimar with the Guest whom
I then had in my Cell. He presently
ordered a Guard to go with me and
seize him: but whether the Length of my 

Stay gave him any Suspicion, or whether he
changed his Purpose after my Departure, I
know not: for at my Return, we found he
had given us the slip; nor could we with
the most diligent Search discover him. 
‘Apsimar being disappointed of his Prey,
now raged at me; at first denouncing the
most dreadful Vengeance, if I did not produce
the deposed Monarch: However, by
soothing his Passion when at the highest,
and afterwards by Canting and Flattery, I
made a shift to escape his Fury. 
‘When Justinian was restored, I very
confidently went to wish him Joy of his
Restoration: but it seems, he had unfortunately
heard of my Treachery, so that he
at first received me coldly, and afterwards
upbraided me openly with what I had done. 
I persevered stoutly in denying it, as I knew
no Evidence could be produced against me; 
till finding him irreconcileable, I betook my
self to reviling him in my Sermons, and on
every other Occasion, as an Enemy to the
Church, and good Men, and as an Infidel,
an Heretic, an Atheist, a Heathen, and an 

Arian. This I did immediately on his Return,
and before he gave those flagrant
Proofs of his Inhumanity, which afterwards
sufficiently verified all I had said. 
‘Luckily, I died on the same Day,
when a great Number of those Forces
which Justinian had sent against the Thracian
Bosphorus, and who had executed such
unheard of Cruelties there, perished. As every
one of these was cast into the Bottomless
Pit, Minos was so tired with Condemnation,
that he proclaimed that all present, who
had not been concerned in that bloody Expedition,
might, if they pleased, return to the
other World. I took him at his Word, and
presently turning about, began my Journey.’ 