




In which Captain Booth begins to relate his
History. 
The Tea-table being removed, and
Mr. Booth and the Lady left alone,
he proceeded as follows. 
‘Since you desire, Madam, to know
the Particulars of my Courtship to that
best and dearest of Women, whom I
afterwards married; I will endeavour to
recollect them as well as I can, at least
all those Incidents which are most worth
relating to you. 
‘If the vulgar Opinion of the Fatality
in Marriage had ever any Sanction, it 

surely, had such in my Marriage with my
Amelia. I knew her in the first Dawn
of her Beauty; and, I believe, Madam,
she had as much as ever fell to the Share
of a Woman; but though I always admired
her, it was long without any Spark
of Love. Perhaps the general Admiration
which at that Time pursued her, the
Respect paid her by Persons of the highest
Rank, and the numberless Addresses
which were made her by Men of great
Fortune, prevented my aspiring at the
Possession of those Charms, which seemed
so absolutely out of my Reach. However
it was, I assure you, the Accident
which deprived her of the Admiration
of others, made the first great Impression
on my Heart in her Favour. The Injury
done to her Beauty by the overturning
of a Chaise, by which, as you may
well remember, her lovely Nose was
beat all to pieces, gave me an Assurance
that the Woman who had been so much
adored for the Charms of her Person,
deserved a much higher Adoration to
be paid to her Mind: For that she was
in the latter Respect infinitely more superior
to the rest of her Sex, than she had
ever been in the former.’ 

‘I admire your Taste extremely,’ cried
the Lady. ‘I remember perfectly well the
great Heroism with which your Amelia
bore that Misfortune.’ 
‘Good Heavens! Madam,’ answered
he, ‘What a Magnanimity of Mind did
her Behaviour demonstrate! If the World
have extolled the Firmness of Soul in a
Man who can support the Loss of Fortune; 
of a General, who can be composed
after the Loss of a Victory; or of
a King, who can be contented with
the Loss of a Crown; with what
Astonishment ought we to behold,
with what Praises to honour a young
Lady, who can with Patience and Resignation
submit to the Loss of exquisite
Beauty, in other Words, to the Loss
of Fortune, Power, Glory; every Thing
which human Nature is apt to court and
rejoice in! What must be the Mind, which
can bear to be deprived of all these in a
Moment, and by an unfortunate trifling
Accident; which could support all this,
together with the most exquisite Torments
of Body, and with Dignity, with Resignation,
without complaining, almost without
a Tear, undergo the most painful and 

dreadful Operations of Surgery in such
a Situation.’ Here he stopt, and a Torrent
of Tears gushed from his Eyes; such
Tears as are apt to flow from a truly noble
Heart, at the hearing of any Thing surprisingly
great and glorious; and which
may perhaps arise from a sudden Transport
at seeing so high an Honour done to that
Nature of which we participate. As soon
as he was able he again proceeded thus: 
‘Would you think, Miss Mathews, that
the Misfortune of my Amelia was capable
of any Aggravation. I assure you,
she hath often told me it was aggravated
with a Circumstance which outweighed
all the other Ingredients. This was the
cruel Insults she received from some of
her most intimate Acquaintance, several
of whom, after many Distortions and
Grimaces, have turned their Heads aside,
unable to support their secret Triumph,
and burst into a loud Laugh in her hearing.’ 
‘Good Heaven!’ cry'd Miss Mathews,
‘What detestable Actions will this contemptible
Passion of Envy prevail on our
Sex to commit?’ 
‘An Occasion of this kind, as she hath
since told me, made the first Impression 

on her gentle Heart in my Favour. I
was one Day in Company with several
young Ladies, or rather young Devils,
where poor Amelia's Accident was the
Subject of much Mirth and Pleasantry. 
One of these said, She hoped Miss would
not bold her Head so high for the future. 
Another answered, I don't know, Madam,
what she may do with her Head, but I am
convinced she will never more turn up her Nose
at her Betters. Another cry'd, What
a very proper Match might now be made
between Amelia and a certain Captain, who
had unfortunately received an Injury in the
same Part, though from no shameful Cause. 
Many other Sarcasins were thrown out,
very unworthy to be repeated. I was
hurt with perceiving so much Malice in
human Shape, and cry'd out very bluntly,
Indeed, Ladies, you need not express such
Satisfaction at poor Miss Emily's Accident: 
For without any Nose at all, she will be the
handsomest Woman in England. This speech
of mine was afterwards variously repeated,
by some to my Honour, and by others
represented in a contrary Light; indeed
it was often reported to be much ruder
than it was. However, it at Length
reached Amelia's Ears. She said she was
very much obliged to me; since I could 

have so much Compassion for her as to be
rude to a Lady on her Account. 
‘About a Month after the Accident,
when Amelia began to see general Company,
in a Mask, I had the Honour to
drink Tea with her. We were alone
together, and I begged her to indulge
my Curiosity by shewing me her Face. 
She answered in a most obliging Manner,
“Perhaps, Mr. Booth, you will as little
know me when my Mask is off as when it
is on; and at the same instant unmasked.” 
—A thousand tender Ideas rushed all
at once on my Mind. I was unable to
contain myself, and eagerly kissing her
Hand, I cried–––Upon my Soul, Madam,
you never appeared to me so lovely as at
this Instant. Nothing more remarkable
passed at this Visit; but I sincerely believe
we were neither of us hereafter indifferent
to each other. 
‘Many Months, however, passed after
this, before I ever thought seriously of
making her my Wife. Not that I wanted
sufficient Love for Amelia. Indeed it
arose from the vast Affection I bore her. 
I considered my own as a desperate Fortune,
hers as entirely dependent on her 

Mother, who was a Woman, you know,
of violent Passions, and very unlikely to
consent to a Match so highly contrary
to the Interest of her daughter. The
more I loved Amelia, the more firmly I
resolved within myself never to propose
Love to her seriously. Such a Dupe was
my Understanding to my Heart; and so
foolishly did I imagine I could be Master
of a Flame to which I was every Day
adding Fuel. 
‘O Miss Mathews! we have heard of
Men entirely Masters of their Passions,
and of Hearts which can carry this Fire
in them, and conceal it at their Pleasure. 
Perhaps there may be such; but if there
are, those Hearts may be compared, I
believe, to Damps, in which it is more
difficult to keep Fire alive than to prevent
its blazing: In mine, it was placed
in the Midst of combustible Matter. 
‘After several Visits, in which Looks
and Sighs had been interchanged on both
Sides, but without the least Mention of
Passion in private, one Day the Discourse
between us, when alone, happened to
turn on Love; I say happened, for I protest
it was not designed on my Side, and 

I am as firmly convinced not on hers. I
was now no longer Master of myself; I
declared myself the most wretched of all
Martyrs to this tender Passion; that I
had long concealed it from its Object. 
At length, after mentioning many Particulars,
suppressing, however, those which
must have necessarily brought it home to
Amelia, I concluded with begging her to
be the Confidente of my Amour, and to
give me her Advice on that Occasion. 
‘Amelia, (O I shall never forget the dear
Perturbation!) appeared all Confusion at
this Instant. She trembled, turned pale,
and discovered how well she understood
me, by a thousand more Symptoms than
I could take Notice of, in a State of
Mind so very little different from her
own. At last, with faltering Accents,
she said, I had made a very ill Choice of
a Counsellor, in a Matter in which she
was so ignorant. –––Adding, at last, I believe,
Mr. Booth, you Gentlemen want very
little Advice in these Affairs, which you all
understand better than we do. 
‘I will relate no more of our Conversation
at present; indeed I am afraid I tire
you with too many Particulars.’ 

‘O no,’ answered she, ‘I should be glad
to hear every Step of an Amour which
had so tender a Beginning. Tell me every
Thing you said or did, if you can remember
it.’ 
He then proceeded, and so will we in
the next Chapter. 



Mr. Booth continues his Story. In this
Chapter there are some Passages that
may serve as a Kind of Touchstone, by
which a young Lady may examine the Heart
of her Lover. I would advise, therefore,
that every Lover be obliged to read it over
in the Presence of his Mistress, and that
she carefully watch his Emotions while he
is reading. 
‘I was under the utmost Concern,’ cries
Booth, ‘when I retired from my Visit,
and had reflected cooly on what I had
said. I now saw plainly that I had made
downright Love to Amelia; and I feared,
such was my Vanity, that I had already
gone too far, and been too successful. 
Feared! do I say, could I fear what I 

hoped? How shall I describe the Anxiety
of my Mind!’ 
‘You need give yourself no great Pain,’ 
cried Miss Mathews, ‘to describe what I
can so easily guess. To be honest with
you, Mr. Booth, I do not agree with your
Lady's Opinion, that the Men have a superior
Understanding in the Matters of
Love. Men are often blind to the Passions
of Women; but every Woman is as
quick-sighted as a Hawk on these Occasions; 
nor is there one Article in the
whole Science which is not understood by
all our Sex.’ 
‘However, Madam,’ said Mr. Booth,
‘I now undertook to deceive Amelia. I
abstained three Days from seeing her; to
say the Truth, I endeavoured to work
myself up to a Resolution of leaving her
for ever; but when I could not so far
subdue my Passion—But why do I
talk Nonsense, of subduing Passion? I
should say when no other Passion could
surmount my Love, I returned to visit
her, and now I attempted the strangest
Project which ever entered into the silly
Head of a Lover. This was to persuade
Amelia that I was really in Love in another
Place, and had literally expressed 

my Meaning, when I asked her Advice,
and desired her to be my Confidente. 
‘I therefore forged a Meeting to have been
between me and my imaginary Mistress,
since I had last seen Amelia, and related
the Particulars as well as I could invent
them, which had past at our Conversation. 
‘Poor Amelia presently swallowed this
Bait, and, as she hath told me since, absolutely
believed me to be in earnest. Poor
dear Love! how should the sincerest of
Hearts have any Idea of Deceit? for with
all her Simplicity I assure you she is the
most sensible Woman in the World.’ 
‘It is highly generous and good in you,’ 
(said Miss Mathews, with a sly sneer) ‘to
impute to Honesty what others would
perhaps call Credulity.’ 
‘I protest, Madam,’ answered he, ‘I
do her no more than Justice. A good
Heart will at all times betray the best
Head in the World. —Well, Madam,
my Angel was now, if possible, more
confused than before. She looked so silly,
you can hardly believe it––– 

‘Yes, yes, I can,’ answered the Lady,
with a Laugh, ‘I can believe it. —Well, well,
go on.’ ‘After some Hesitation,’ cried
he, ‘my Amelia said faintly to me, “Mr.
Booth; you use me very ill, you desire
me to be your Confidente, and conceal
from me the Name of your Mistress.” 
‘Is it possible then, Madam, answered
I, that you cannot guess her, when I tell
you she is one of your Acquaintance, and
lives in this Town?’ 
“My Acquaintance,” said she, “La! Mr.
Booth. —In this Town. I—I—I thought
I could have guessed for once; but I have
an ill Talent that way—I will never attempt
to guess any thing again.” ‘Indeed
I do her an Injury when I pretend to represent
her Manner. Her Manner, Look,
Voice, every thing was inimitable; such
Sweetness, Softness, Innocence, Modesty. 
—Upon my Soul, if ever Man could
boast of his Resolution, I think I might
now, that I abstained from falling prostrate
at her Feet and adoring her. However,
I triumphed; Pride, I believe, triumphed,
or perhaps Love got the better
of Love. We once more parted, and 

I promised, the next time I saw her, to
reveal the Name of my Mistress. 
‘I now had, I thought, gained a complete
Victory over myself; and no small
Compliments did I pay to my own Resolution. 
In short I triumphed as Cowards
and Niggards do when they flatter
themselves with having given some supposed
Instance of Courage or Generosity; 
and my Triumph lasted as long; that is
to say, till my ascendent Passion had a
proper Opportunity of displaying itself
in its true and natural Colours. 
‘Having hitherto succeeded so well in
my own Opinion, and obtained this
mighty Self-conquest, I now entertained
a Design of exerting the most romantic
Generosity, and of curing that unhappy
Passion which I perceived I had raised in
Amelia. 
‘Among the Ladies who had expressed
the greatest Satisfaction at my Amelia's
Misfortune, Miss Osborne had distinguished
herself in a very eminent Degree; 
she was indeed the next in Beauty to my
Angel, nay she had disputed the Preference,
and had some among her Admirers, 

who were blind enough to give
it in her Favour.’ 
‘Well,’ cries the Lady, ‘I will allow
you to call them blind; but Miss Osborne
was a charming Girl.’ 
‘She certainly was handsome,’ answered
he, ‘and a very considerable Fortune; so I
thought my Amelia would have little Difficulty
in believing me, when I fixed on her
as my Mistress. And I concluded, that
my thus placing my Affections on her
known Enemy would be the surest Method
of eradicating every tender Idea
with which I had been ever honoured by
Amelia.’ 
‘Well then, to Amelia I went; she received
me with more than usual Coldness
and Reserve. In which, to confess the
Truth, there appeared to me more of
Anger than Indifference, and more of
Dejection than of either. After some
short Introduction I revived the Discourse
of my Amour, and presently mentioned
Miss Osborne as the Lady whose Name
I had concealed; adding, that the true
Reason why I did not mention her before,
was, that I apprehended there was 

some little Distance between them, which
I hoped to have the Happiness of accommodating. 
“Amelia answered with much Gravity” 
If you know, Sir, that there is any Distance
between us, I suppose you know
the Reason of that Distance; and then I
think I could not have expected to be
affronted by her Name. I would not
have you think, Mr. Booth, that I hate
Miss Osborne. No! Heaven is my Witness,
I despise her too much. —Indeed
when I reflect how much I loved the
Woman who hath treated me so cruelly,
I own it gives me Pain—When I lay, as
I then imagined, and as all about me
believed, on my Death-bed, in all the
Agonies of Pain and Misery, to become
the Object of Laughter to my dearest
Friend. —O Mr. Booth, it is a cruel Reflection! 
And could I after this have
expected from you: —But why not from
you, to whom I am a Person entirely
indifferent, if such a Friend could treat
me so barbarously?” 
‘During the greatest Part of this Speech
the Tears streamed from her bright Eyes. 
I could endure it no longer. I caught 

up the Word indifferent, and repeated it,
saying, Do you think then, Madam,
that Miss Emily is indifferent to me?’ 
“Yes surely I do,” answered she, “I
know I am; indeed why should I not
be indifferent to you?” 
‘Have my Eyes,’ said I, ‘then, declared
nothing?’ 
“O there is no need of your Eyes,” answered
she. “Your Tongue hath declared
that you have singled out of all Womankind
my greatest, I will say, my basest
Enemy. —I own I once thought that
Character would have been no Recommendation
to you. —But why did I think
so? I was born to be miserable and to
deceive myself.” 
‘I then fell on my Knees before her; 
and forcing her Hand, cried out, O my
Amelia, I can bear no longer. You are
the only Mistress of my Affections; you
are the Deity I adore. In this Stile I ran
on for above two or three Minutes, what
it is impossible to repeat, till a Torrent
of contending Passions, together with the
Surprize, overpowered her gentle Spirits, 

and she fainted away dead in my
Arms. 
‘To describe my Sensation till she returned
to herself, is not in my Power.’ — 
‘You need not,’ cried Miss Mathews. — 
‘Oh! happy Amelia! why had I not been blest
with such a Passion?’ —‘I am convinced,
Madam,’ continued he, ‘you cannot
expect all the Particulars of the tender
Scene which ensued. I was not enough
in my Senses to remember it all. Let it
suffice, that from this Day we perfectly
understood each other. That Behaviour
with which Amelia, while ignorant of
its Motive, had been so much displeased,
when she became sensible of that Motive,
proved the strongest Recommendation to
her Favour; and she was pleased to call
it generous.’ 
‘Generous!’ repeated the Lady, ‘and
so it was almost beyond the Reach of
human Nature. I question whether you
ever had an Equal.’ 
Perhaps the critical Reader may have
the same Doubt with Miss Mathews; and,
lest he should, we will here make a Gap
in our History, to give him an Opportunity 

of accurately considering whether this
Conduct of Mr. Booth was natural or no; 
and consequently whether we have in this
Place maintained or deviated from that
strict Adherence to Truth which we profess
above all other Historians. 



The Narrative continued. More of the Touchstone. 
Booth made a proper Acknowledgment
of Miss Mathews's Civility, and
then renewed his Story. 
‘We were upon the Footing of Lovers; 
and Amelia threw off her Reserve more
and more, till at length I found all that
Return of my Affection which the tenderest
Lover can require. 
‘My Situation would now have been in
Paradise, had not my Happiness been
interrupted with the same Reflexions I
have already mentioned; had I not, in
short, concluded, that I must derive all
my Joys from the almost certain Ruin of
that dear Creature to whom I should owe
them. 

‘This Thought haunted me Night and
Day; till I, at last, grew unable to support
it: I therefore resolved, in the
strongest Manner, to lay it before Amelia. 
‘One Evening then, after the highest
Professions of the most disinterested Love,
in which Heaven knows my Sincerity, I
took an Occasion to speak to Amelia, in
the following Manner. 
“Too true is it, I am afraid, my dearest
Creature, that the highest human
Happiness is imperfect. How rich
would be my Cup, was it not for one
bitter Drop, which poisons the whole! 
O Amelia, what must be the Consequence
of my ever having the Honour
to call you mine! —You know my Situation
in Life, and you know your own: 
I have nothing more than the poor Provision
of an Ensign's Commission to depend
on; your sole Dependance is on
your Mother; should any Act of Disobedience
defeat your Expectations,
how wretched must your Lot be with
Me! O Amelia, how ghastly an Object to
my Mind is the Apprehension of your
Distress! Can I bear to reflect a Moment 

on the Certainty of your foregoing
all the Conveniences of Life; on the Possibility
of your suffering all its most dreadful
Inconveniences! What must be my
Misery then, to see you in such a Situation,
and to upbraid myself with being
the accursed Cause of bringing you to
it! Suppose too in such a Season I
should be summoned from you. Could
I submit to see you encounter all the
Hazards, the Fatigues of War, with me! 
You could not yourself, however willing,
support them a single Campaign. 
What then, must I leave you to starve
alone, deprived of the Tenderness of a
Husband, deprived too of the Tenderness
of the best of Mothers, through my
Means? A Woman on whom I myself
doat, for being the Parent, the Nurse,
and the Friend of my Amelia. —But, O
my sweet Creature, carry your Thoughts
a little farther. Think of the tenderest
Consequences, the dearest Pledges of our
Love. Can I bear to think of entailing
Beggary on the Posterity of my Amelia? 
On our—O Heavens! on our
Children? —On the other side, is it possible
even to mention the Word—I will
not, must not, cannot, cannot, part 

with you. —What must we do, Amelia?
it is now I sincerely ask your Advice.” 
‘What Advice can I give you,’ said
she, ‘in such an Alternative? Would to
Heaven we had never met.’ 
‘These Words were accompanied with
a Sigh, and a Look inexpressibly tender,
the Tears at the same Time overflowing
all her lovely Cheeks. I was endeavouring
to reply, when I was interrupted
by what soon put an End to the
Scene. 
‘Our Amour had already been buzzed
all over the Town; and it came at last
to the Ears of Mrs. Harris: I had, indeed,
observed of late a great Alteration
in that Lady's Behaviour towards
me, whenever I visited at the House; 
nor could I, for a long Time, before
this Evening, ever obtain a private Interview
with Amelia; and now, it seems,
I owed it to her Mother's Intention of
over-hearing all that passed between
us. 
‘At the Period then abovementioned,
Mrs. Harris burst from the Closet, where 

she had hid herself, and surprised her
Daughter, reclining on my Bosom, in
all that tender Sorrow I have just
described. I will not attempt to paint
the Rage of the Mother, or the Daughter's
and my Confusion. “Here are
very fine Doings, indeed,” cries Mrs.
Harris; “You have made a fine Use,
Amelia, of my Indulgence, and the
Trust I reposed in you. —As for you,
Mr. Booth, I will not accuse you; you
have used my Child, as I ought to
have expected; I may thank myself for
what hath happened;” ‘with much
more of the same kind, before she would
suffer me to speak; but, at last, I obtained
a Hearing, and offered to excuse
my poor Amelia, who was ready to sink
into the Earth under the Oppression of
Grief, by taking as much Blame as I
could on myself.’ Mrs. Harris answered,
“No, Sir, I must say you are
innocent in Comparison of her; nay, I
can say, I have heard you use dissuasive
Arguments; and I promise you they are
true ones. I have, I thank Heaven,
one dutiful Child, and I shall henceforth
think her my only one:” ‘She then
forc'd the poor, trembling, fainting
Amelia out of the Room; which when 

she had done, she began very cooly to
reason with me on the Folly, as well as
Iniquity, which I had been guilty of,
and repeated to me almost every Word
I had before urged to her Daughter. In
fine, she, at last, obtained of me a Promise
that I would soon go to my Regiment,
and submit to any Misery, rather
than that of being the Ruin of Amelia. 
‘I now, during many Days, endured
the greatest Torments which the human
Mind is, I believe, capable of feeling: 
And I can honestly say I try'd all the
Means, and applied every Argument which
I could raise to cure me of my Love. 
And to make these the more effectual,
I spent every Night in walking backwards
and forwards in Sight of Mrs.
Harris's House, where I never failed to
find some Object or other, which raised
some tender Idea of my lovely Amelia,
and almost drove me to Distraction.’ 
‘And, don't you think, Sir,’ said Miss
Mathews, ‘you took a most preposterous
Method to cure yourself?’ 

‘Alas, Madam,’ answered he, ‘you
cannot see it in a more absurd Light than
I do; but those know little of real Love
or Grief, who do not know how much
we deceive ourselves when we pretend to
aim at the Cure of either. It is with
these as it is with some Distempers of
the Body, nothing is, in the least, agreeable
to us but what serves to heighten the
Disease.’ 
‘At the End of a Fortnight, when I
was driven almost to the highest Degree
of Despair, and could contrive no Method
of conveying a Letter to Amelia,
how was I surprised when Mrs. Harris's
Servant brought me a Card, with an Invitation
from the Mother herself, to drink
Tea that Evening at her House! 
‘You will easily believe, Madam, that
I did not fail so agreeable an Appointment; 
on my Arrival I was introduced
into a large Company of Men and Women,
Mrs. Harris and my Amelia being
part of the Company. 
‘Amelia seemed in my Eyes to look
more beautiful than ever, and behaved
with all the Gaiety imaginable. The old 

Lady treated me with much Civility; 
but the young Lady took little Notice
of me, and addressed most of her Discourse
to another Gentleman present. 
Indeed, she now and then gave me a
Look of no discouraging Kind; and I
observed her Colour change more than
once, when her Eyes met mine: Circumstances
which, perhaps, ought to
have afforded me sufficient Comfort; 
but they could not allay the thousand
Doubts and Fears with which I was alarmed: 
For my anxious Thoughts suggested
no less to me than that Amelia
had made her Peace with her Mother at
the Price of abandoning me for ever, and
of giving her Ear to some other Lover. 
All my Prudence now vanish'd at once; 
and I would that Instant have gladly run
away with Amelia, and have married her
without the least Consideration of any
Consequences. 
‘With such Thoughts I had tormented
myself for near two Hours, till most of
the Company had taken their Leave. This
I was myself in capable of doing; nor do I
know when I should have put an End to
my Visit, had not Dr. Harrison taken me 

away almost by Force, telling me in a
Whisper, that he had something to say to
me of great Consequence. —You know
the Doctor, Madam—’ 
‘Very well,’ Sir, answered Miss Mathews,
‘and one of the best Men in the World
he is, and an Honour to the sacred Order
to which he belongs.’ 
‘You will judge,’ replied Booth, ‘by the
Sequel, whether I have reason to think
him so.’ —He then proceeded as in the
next Chapter. 



The Story of Mr. Booth continued: In this
Chapter the Reader will perceive a Glimpse
of the Character of a very good Divine; 
with some Matters of a very tender kind. 
‘The Doctor conducted me into
his Study; and then desiring me
to sit down, began, as near as I can remember,
in these Words, or at least to
this Purpose: 
“You cannot imagine, young Gentleman,
that your Love for Miss Emily is 

any Secret in this Place; I have known it
some Time, and have been, I assure you,
very much your Enemy in this Affair.” 
‘I answered, that I was very much obliged
to him. 
“Why so you are,” replied he, “and so
perhaps you will think yourself when you
know all. –––I went about a Fortnight
ago to Mrs. Harris, to acquaint her
with my Apprehensions on her Daughter's
Account: for tho' the Matter was
much talked of, I thought it might possibly
not have reached her Ears. I will
be very plain with you. I advised her
to take all possible Care of the young
Lady, and even to send her to some
Place, where she might be effectually
kept out of your Reach, while you remained
in the Town.” 
‘And do you think, Sir,’ said I, ‘that
this was acting a kind Part by me? Or do
you expect that I should thank you on
this Occasion?’ 
“Young Man,” answered he, “I did
not intend you any Kindness; nor do I
desire any of your Thanks. My Intention 

was to preserve a worth Lady
from a young Fellow of whom I had
heard no good Character, and whom I
imagined to have a Design of stealing
a human Creature for the Sake of her
Fortune.” 
‘It was very kind of you, indeed,’ answered
I, ‘to entertain such an Opinion of
me.’ 
“Why, Sir,” replied the Doctor, “it
is the Opinion which, I believe, most
of you young Gentlemen, of the Order
of the Rag deserve. I have known some
Instances, and have heard of more, where
such young Fellows have committed
Robbery under the name of Marriage:
for, as little famed as the Army is for
Religion, nothing is, I believe, more
common than for the Officers to make
good Christians of their Wives, and
to teach them true Repentance.” 
‘I was going to interrupt him with
some Anger, when he desired me to have
a little Patience, and then informed me,
that he had visited Mrs. Harris, with the
abovementioned Design the Evening
after the Discovery I have related; that 

Mrs. Harris, without waiting for his Information,
had recounted to him all which
had happened the Evening before; and
indeed she must have an excellent Memory,
for I think she repeated every
Word I said; and added, that she had
confined her Daughter to her Chamber,
where she kept her a close Prisoner, and
had not seen her since. 
‘I cannot express, nor would Modesty
suffer me if I could, all that now past. 
The Doctor took me by the Hand, and
burst forth into the warmest Commendations
of the Sense and Generosity which
he was pleased to say discovered themselves
in my Speech. You know, Madam,
his strong and singular Way of expressing
himself on all Occasions, especially when
he is affected with any Thing. Sir, said
he, if I knew half a Dozen such Instances
in the Army, the Painter should put
red Liveries upon all the Saints in my
Closet. 
‘From this Instant the Doctor told me,
he had become my Friend and zealous
Advocate with Mrs. Harris, on whom he
had at last prevailed, though not without
the greatest Difficulty, to consent to my 

marrying Amelia, upon Condition that I
settled every Penny which the Mother
should lay down; and that she would
retain a certain Sum in her Hands, which
she would at any time deposite for my
Advancement in the Army.’ 
‘You will, I hope, Madam, conceive,
that I made no Hesitation at these Conditions; 
nor need I mention the Joy which
I felt on this Occasion, or the Acknowledgment
I paid the Doctor, who is indeed,
as you say, one of the best of
Men. 
‘The next Morning I had Permission
to visit Amelia, who received me in such a
Manner, that I now concluded my Happiness
to be complete. 
‘Every thing was now agreed on all Sides,
and Lawyers employed to prepare the Writings,
when an unexpected Cloud arose
suddenly in our serene Sky, and all our
Joys were obscured in a Moment. 
‘When Matter were, as I apprehended,
drawing near a Conclusion, I received
an Express that a Sister, whom I
tenderly loved, was seized with a violent 

Fever, and earnestly desired me to come
to her. I immediately obeyed the Summons,
and, as it was then about Two
in the Morning, without staying even
to take Leave of Amelia, for whom I left
a short Billet, acquainting her with the
Reason of my Absence. 
‘The Gentleman's House where my
Sister then was, stood at fifty Miles distance,
and tho' I used the utmost Expedition,
the unmerciful Distemper had,
before my Arrival, entirely deprived the
poor Girl of her Senses, as it soon after
did of her Life. 
‘Not all the Love I bore Amelia, nor
the tumultuous Delight with which the
approaching Hour of possessing her filled
my Heart, could for a while allay
my Grief at the Loss of my beloved
Nancy. Upon my Soul, I cannot yet mention
her Name without Tears. Never
Brother and Sister had, I believe, a
higher Friendship for each other. Poor
dear Girl! whilst I sat by her in her Light-head
Fits, she repeated scarce any other
Name but mine: And it plainly appeared
that when her dear Reason was ravish'd
away from her, it had left my Image on 

her Memory, and that the last Use she
had made of it was to think on me.’ — 
“Send for my dear Billy immediately,” 
she cry'd, “I know he will come to me
in a Moment. Will no Body fetch him
to me? Pray don't kill me before I see
him once more—You durst not use me
so if he was here.” —‘Every Accent still
rings in my Ears. —Oh Heavens! to hear
this, and at the same Time to see the poor
delirious Creature deriving the greatest
Horrors from my Sight, and mistaking
me for a Highwayman who had a little
before robbed her. —But I ask your Pardon,
the Sensations I felt are to be known
only from Experience, and to you must
appear dull and insipid. —At last she
seemed for a Moment to know me, and
cry'd, “O Heavens! my dearest Brother!” 
upon which she fell into immediate
Convulsions, and died away in my
Arms.’ 
Here Booth stop'd a Moment, and wip'd
his Eyes; and Miss Mathews, perhaps out
of Complaisance, wip'd hers. 




Containing strange Revolutions of Fortune. 
Booth proceeded thus. 
‘This Loss, perhaps, Madam, you
will think had made me miserable enough; 
but Fortune did not think so; 
for on the Day when my Nancy was to
be buried, a Courier arrived from Dr.
Harrison with a Letter, in which the
Doctor acquainted me, that he was just
come from Mrs. Harris, when he dispatched
the Express; and earnestly desired me
to return the very Instant I received his
Letter, as I valued my Amelia. Tho' if
the Daughter, added he, should take after
her Mother (as most of them do) it will be,
perhaps, wiser in you to stay away. 
‘I presently sent for the Messenger into
my Room, and with much Difficulty
extorted from him, that a great Squire
in his Coach and Six was come to
Mrs. Harris's, and that the whole Town
said he was shortly to be married to
Amelia. 

‘I now soon perceived how much superior
my Love for Amelia was to every
other Passion; poor Nancy's Idea disappeared
in a Moment: I quitted the dear
lifeless Corpse, over which I had shed a
thousand Tears, left the Care of her Funeral
to others, and posted, I may almost
say flew, back to Amelia, and
alighted at the Doctor's House, as he
had desired me in his Letter. 
‘The good Man presently acquainted
me with what had happened in my Absence. 
Mr. Winckworth had, it seems,
arrived the very Day of my Departure
with a grand Equipage, and, without
Delay, had made formal Proposals to
Mrs. Harris, offering to settle any Part
of his vast Estate, in whatever Manner
she pleased, on Amelia. These Proposals
the old Lady had, without any
Deliberation, accepted, and had insisted,
in the most violent Manner, on her
Daughter's Compliance, which Amelia
had as peremptorily refused to give; 
insisting on her Part, on the Consent
which her Mother had before given to
our Marriage, in which she was heartily
seconded by the Doctor, who declared 

to her, as he now did to me,’ “that we
ought as much to be esteemed Man
and Wife, as if the Ceremony had already
past between us.” 
‘These Remonstrances, the Doctor told
me, had worked no Effect on Mrs. Harris,
who still persisted in her avowed Resolution
of marrying her Daughter to Winckworth,
whom the Doctor had likewise
attacked, telling him that he was paying
his Addresses to another Man's Wife; 
but all to no Purpose, the young Gentleman
was too much in Love to hearken
to any Dissuasives. 
‘We now entered into a Consultation
what Means to employ. The Doctor
earnestly protested against any Violence
to be offered to the Person of Winckworth,
which, I believe, I had rashly
threatened; declaring, that if I made any
Attempt of that Kind, he would for ever
abandon my Cause. I made him a solemn
Promise of Forbearance. At last, he determined
to pay another Visit to Mrs.
Harris, and if he found her obdurate, he
said he thought himself at Liberty to join
us together without any further Consent
of the Mother; which every Parent, he 

said, had a Right to refuse, but not to
retract when given, unless the Party himself,
by some Conduct of his, gave a
Reason. 
‘The Doctor having made his Visit
with no better Success than before, the
Matter now debated was, how to get
Possession of Amelia by Stratagem: for she
was now a closer Prisoner than ever, was
her Mother's Bed-fellow by Night, and
never out of her Sight by Day. 
‘While we were deliberating on this
Point, a Wine Merchant of the Town
came to visit the Doctor, to inform him
that he had just bottled off a Hogshead
of excellent old Port, of which he offered
to spare him a Hamper, saying, that he
was that Day to send in twelve Dozen to
Mrs. Harris. 
‘The Doctor now smiled at a Conceit
which came into his Head; and, taking
me aside, asked me if I had Love
enough for the young Lady to venture
into the House in a Hamper. I joyfully
leapt at the Proposal, to which the Merchant,
at the Doctor's Intercession, consented:
for I believe, Madam, you know 

the great Authority which that worthy
Man had over the whole Town. The
Doctor, moreover, promised to procure
a Licence, and to perform the Office for
us at his House, if I could find any
Means of conveying Amelia thither. 
‘In this Hamper then I was carried to
the House, and deposited in the Entry,
where I had not lain long before I was
again removed and packed up in a Cart,
in order to be sent five Miles into the
Country: for I heard the Orders given
as I lay in the Entry; and there I likewise
heard that Amelia and her Mother
were to follow me the next Morning. 
‘I was unloaded from my Cart, and
set down with the rest of the Lumber, in
a great Hall. Here I remained above
three Hours, impatiently waiting for the
Evening, when I determined to quit a
Posture, which was become very uneasy,
and break my Prison; but Fortune contrived
to release me sooner, by the following
Means. The House where I now
was had been left in the Care of one
Maid-servant. This faithful Creature
came into the Hall, with the Footman
who had driven the Cart. A Scene of 

the highest Fondness having past between
them, the Fellow proposed, and the
Maid consented, to open the Hamper
and drink a Bottle together, which they
agreed their Mistress would hardly miss
in such a Quantity. They presently began
to execute their Purpose. They
opened the Hamper, and to their great
Surprize discovered the Contents. 
‘I took an immediate Advantage of the
Consternation which appeared in the
Countenances of both the Servants, and
had sufficient Prefence of Mind to improve
the Knowledge of those Secrets to
which I was privy. I told them that
it entirely depended on their Behaviour
to me whether their Mistress should ever
be acquainted, either with what they had
done, or with what they had intended to
do: for that if they would keep my Secret,
I would reciprocally keep theirs. 
I then acquainted them with my Purpose
of lying concealed in the House, in order
to watch an Opportunity of obtaining a
private Interview with Amelia. 
‘In the Situation in which these two
Delinquents stood, you may be assured
it was not difficult for me to seal up 

their Lips. In short they agreed to whatever
I proposed. I lay that Evening in
my dear Amelia's Bed-chamber, and was
in the Morning conveyed into an old
lumber Garret, where I was to wait till
Amelia (whom the Maid promised, on
her Arrival, to inform of my Place of
Concealment) could find some Opportunity
of seeing me.’ 
‘I ask Pardon for interrupting you,’ 
cries Miss Mathews, ‘but you bring to my
Remembrance a foolish Story which I
heard at that time, tho' at a great Distance
from you: That an Officer had,
in Confederacy with Miss Harris, broke
open her Mother's Cellar, and stole
away a great Quantity of her Wine. I
mention it only to shew you what Sort
of Foundations most Stories have.’ 
Booth told her he had heard some such
thing himself, and then continued his Story
as in the next Chapter. 




Containing many surprising Adventures. 
‘Here,’ continued he, ‘I remained
the whole Day in Hopes of a Happiness,
the expected Approach of which,
gave me such Delight, that I would not
have exchanged my poor Lodgings for
the finest Palace in the Universe. 
‘A little after it was dark Mrs. Harris
arrived, together with Amelia and her
Sister. I cannot express how much my
Heart now began to flutter; for as my
Hopes every Moment encreased, strange
Fears which I had not felt before began
now to intermingle with them. 
‘When I had continued full two Hours
in these Circumstances, I heard a Woman's
Step tripping up Stairs, which I
fondly hoped was my Amelia; but all on
a sudden the Door flew open, and Mrs.
Harris herself appeared at it, with a
Countenance pale as Death, her whole
Body trembling, I suppose, with Anger; 
she fell upon me in the most bitter Language. 
It is not necessary to repeat what 

she said, nor indeed can I, I was so
shocked and confounded on this Occasion. 
—In a Word the Scene ended with
my departing without seeing Amelia.’ 
‘And pray,’ cries Miss Mathews, ‘how
happened this unfortunate Discovery?’ 
‘Booth answered, ‘That the Lady at
Supper ordered a Bottle of Wine, which
neither myself,’ cries he, ‘nor the Servants,
had Presence of Mind to provide. Being
told there was none in the House, tho'
she had been before informed that the
things came all safe, she had sent for the
Maid, who being unable to devise any
Excuse, had fallen on her Knees, and
after confessing her Design of opening a
Bottle, which she imputed to the Fellow,
betrayed poor me to her Mistress. 
‘Well, Madam, after a Lecture of about
a Quarter of an Hour's Duration from
Mrs. Harris, I suffered her to conduct
me to the outward Gate of her Courtyard,
whence I set forward in a disconsolate
Condition of Mind, towards my
Lodgings. I had five Miles to walk in
a dark and rainy Night; but how can I
mention these trifling Circumstances as 

any Aggravation of my Disappointment. 
‘How was it possible,’ cried Miss Mathews,
‘that you could be got out of the
House without seeing Miss Harris?’ 
‘I assure you, Madam,’ answered Booth,
‘I have often wondered at it myself; but
my Spirits were so much sunk at the Sight
of her Mother, that no Man was ever a
greater Coward than I was at that Instant:
Indeed I believe my tender Concern for
the Terrors of Amelia were the principal
Cause of my Submission. However it was; 
I left the House, and walked about a hundred
Yards, when, at the Corner of the
Garden Wall, a female Voice, in a Whisper,
cried out, “Mr. Booth.” The Person
was extremely near me, but it was so dark
I could scarce see her; nor did I, in the
Confusion I was in, immediately recognize
the Voice. I answered in a Line of
Congreve's, which burst from my Lips
spontaneously; for I am sure I had no
Intention to quote Plays at that time, 
‘Who calls the wretched thing that was
Alphonso?’ 

‘Upon which a Woman leapt into my
Arms, crying out,—“O it is indeed
my Alphonso, my only Alphonso!” —‘O
Miss Mathews! guess what I felt when I
found I had my Amelia in my Arms. I
embraced her with an Extasy not to be
described, at the same instant pouring a
thousand Tendernesses into her Ears; 
at least if I could express so many to her
in a Minute; for in that time the Alarm
began at the House, Mrs. Harris had mist
her Daughter, and the Court was presently
full of Lights and Noises of all
Kinds. 
‘I now lifted Amelia over a Gate, and
jumping after her, we crept along together
by the Side of a Hedge, a different
Way from what led to the Town,
as I imagined that would be the Road
through which they would pursue us. 
In this Opinion I was right: for we heard
them pass along that Road, and the
Voice of Mrs. Harris herself, who ran
with the rest, notwithstanding the Darkness
and the Rain. By these Means we
luckily made our Escape, and clambring
over Hedge and Ditch, my Amelia performing
the Part of a Heroine all the 

Way, we at length arrived at a little
green Lane, where stood a vast spreading
Oak, under which we sheltered ourselves
from a violent Storm. 
‘When this was over, and the Moon
began to appear, Amelia declared she
knew very well where she was; and a
little farther, striking into another Lane,
to the Right, she said, that would lead
us to a House where we should be both
safe and unsuspected. I followed her
Directions, and we at length came to a
little Cottage about three Miles distant
from Mrs. Harris's House. 
‘As it now rained very violently, we
entered this Cottage, in which we espied
a Light, without any Ceremony. Here
we found an elderly Woman fitting by
herself at a little Fire, who had no sooner
viewed us, than she instantly sprung from
her Seat, and starting back, gave the
strongest Tokens of Amazement; upon
which Amelia, presently recollecting her,
said,’ “Be not surprised, Nurse, tho'
you see me in a strange Pickle I own.” 
‘The old Woman, after having several
times blessed herself, and expressed the
most tender Concern for the Lady, who 

stood dripping before her, began to bestir
herself in making up the Fire; at the
same time entreating Amelia that she
might be permitted to furnish her with
some Cloaths, which, she said, tho' not
fine, were clean and wholesome, and much
dryer than her own. I seconded this
Motion so vehemently, that Amelia, tho'
she declared herself under no Apprehension
of catching Cold, (she hath indeed
the best Constitution in the World) at
last consented, and I retired without
Doors, under a Shed, to give my Angel
an Opportunity of dressing herself in the
only Room which the Cottage afforded
below Stairs. 
‘At my Return into the Room, Amelia
insisted on my exchanging my Coat for
one which belonged to the old Woman's
Son.’ —‘I am very glad,’ cried Miss
Mathews, ‘to find she did not forget you. 
I own I thought it somewhat cruel to
turn you out into the Rain!’ —‘O
Miss Mathews,’ continued he, taking no
Notice of her Observation, ‘I had now
an Opportunity of contemplating the vast
Power of exquisite Beauty; which nothing
almost can add to or diminish. 
Amelia, in the poor Rags of her old 

Nurse, looked scarce less beautiful than
I have seen her appear at a Ball or an
Assembly’— ‘Well, well,’ cries Miss Mathews,
‘to be sure she did;—but pray go
on with your Story.’ 
‘The old Woman,’ continued he, ‘after
having equipped us as well as she could,
and placed our wet Cloaths before the
Fire, began to grow inquisitive; and,
after some Ejaculations, she cried—“O
my dear young Madam, my Mind misgives
me hugeously, and pray who is
this fine young Gentleman? Oh! Miss
Emmy, Miss Emmy, I am afraid Madam
knows nothing of all this Matter.” 
“Suppose he should be my Husband,
Nurse,” answered Amelia,—“Oh!
good! an if he be,” replies the Nurse,
“I hope he is some great Gentleman or
other, with a vast Estate, and a Coach
and Six: for to be sure if an he was the
greatest Lord in the Land you would
deserve it all.” —‘But why do I attempt
to mimic the honest Creature. In short
she discovered the greatest Affection for
my Amelia; with which I was much
more delighted than I was offended at
the Suspicions she shewed of me, or the
many bitter Curses which she denounced 

against me, if I ever proved a bad Husband
to so sweet a young Lady. 
‘I so well improved the Hint given me
by Amelia, that the old Woman had no
Doubt of our being really married; and
comforting herself that if it was not as
well as it might have been, yet Madam
had enough for us both, and that Happiness
did not always depend on great
Riches, she began to rail at the old Lady
for having turned us out of Doors, which
I scarce told an Untruth in asserting. 
And when Amelia said, “She hoped her
Nurse would not betray her”—The good
Woman answered with much Warmth,— 
“Betray you, my dear young Madam! no
that I would not if the King would give
me all he is worth. No, not if Madam
herself would give me the great House,
and the whole Farm belonging to it.” 
‘The good Woman then went out and
fetched a Chicken from the Roost, which
she killed, and began to pick, without
asking any Questions. Then summoning
her Son, who was in Bed, to her
Assistance, she began to prepare this
Chicken for our Supper. This she afterwards
set before us in so neat, I may almost 

say elegant a Manner, that whoever
would have disdained it, either doth
not know the Sensation of Hunger, or
doth not deserve to have the Blessing of
satisfying it. Our Food was attended
with some Ale, which our kind Hostess
said she intended not to have tap'd till
Christmas; “but,” added she, “I little
thought ever to have the Honour of seeing
my dear honoured Lady in this poor
Place.” 
‘For my own Part, no human Being
was then an Object of Envy to me, and
even Amelia seemed to be in pretty good
Spirits; she softly whispered to me, that
she perceived there might be Happiness in a
Cottage. 
‘A Cottage!’ cries Miss Mathews sighing,
‘A Cottage with the Man one loves
is a Palace.’ 
‘When Supper was ended,’ continued
Booth, ‘the good Woman began to think
of our further Wants, and very earnestly
recommended her Bed to us, saying it
was a very neat, tho' homely one, and
that she could furnish us with a Pair of
clean Sheets. She added some Persuasives 

which painted my Angel all over
with Vermillion. As for myself I behaved
so aukwardly and foolishly, and so
readily agreed to Amelia's Resolution of
sitting up all Night, that if it did not
give the Nurse any Suspicion of our
Marriage, it ought to have inspired her
with the utmost Contempt for me. 
‘We both endeavoured to prevail with
Nurse to retire to her own Bed, but
found it utterly impossible to succeed; 
she thanked Heaven she understood
Breeding better than that. And so well
bred was the good Woman, that we could
scarce get her out of the Room the
whole Night. Luckily for us we both
understood French, by means of which
we consulted together, even in her Presence,
upon the Measures we were to
take in our present Exigency. At length,
it was resolved that I should send a Letter
by this young Lad whom I have just
before mentioned, to our worthy Friend
the Doctor, desiring his Company at our
Hut, since we thought it utterly unsafe
to venture to the Town, which we knew
would be in an Uproar on our Account
before the Morning.’ 

Here Booth made a full Stop, smiled,
and then said, he was going to mention so
ridiculous a Distress, that he could scarce
think of it without laughing. —What this
was the Reader shall know in the next
Chapter. 



The Story of Booth continued. More surprising
Adventures. 
‘From what Trifles, dear Miss Mathews,’ 
cried Booth, ‘may some of
our greatest Distresses arise! Do you not
perceive I am going to tell you we had
neither Pen, Ink, nor Paper in our present
Exigency. 
‘A verbal Message was now our only
Resource; however, we contrived to deliver
it in such Terms, that neither Nurse
nor her Son could possibly conceive any
Suspicion from it of the present Situation
of our Affairs. Indeed, Amelia whisper'd
me, I might safely place any Degree of
Confidence in the Lad; for he had been
her Foster Brother, and she had a great
Opinion of his Integrity. He was in 

Truth a Boy of very good natural Parts; 
and Dr. Harrison, who had received him
into his Family, at Amelia's Recommendation,
had bred him up to write and read
very well, and had taken some Pains to
infuse into him the Principles of Honesty
and Religion. He was not, indeed, even
now discharged from the Doctor's Service; 
but had been at home with his
Mother for some time on Account of the
Small-Pox, from a very grievous Attack
of which he was lately recovered. 
‘I have said so much’, continued Booth,
‘of the Boy's Character, that you may not
be surprised at some Stories which I shall
tell you of him hereafter. 
‘I am going now, Madam, to relate
to you one of those strange Accidents,
which are produced by such a Train of
Circumstances, that mere Chance hath
been thought incapable of bringing them
together; and which have therefore given
Birth, in superstitious Minds, to Fortune,
and to several other imaginary Beings. 
‘We were now impatiently expecting
the Arrival of the Doctor, our Messenger 

gone much more than a sufficient Time,
which to us, you may be assured, appeared
not in the least shorter than it was,
when Nurse, who had gone out of Doors
on some Errand, came running hastily to us,
crying out, “O my dear young Madam,
her Ladyship's Coach is just at the Door.” 
Amelia turned pale as Death at these
Words; indeed I feared she would have
fainted, if I could be said to fear, who had
scarce any of my Senses left, and was in
a Condition little better than my Angel's. 
‘While we were both in this dreadful
Situation, Amelia fallen back in her Chair
with the Countenance in which Ghosts
are painted, myself at her Feet, with a
Complexion of no very different Colour,
and Nurse screaming out, and
throwing Water in Amelia's Face, Mrs.
Harris entered the Room. At the Sight
of this Scene, she threw herself likewise
into a Chair, and called immediately for a
Glass of Water, which Miss Betty her
Daughter supplied her with: For, as to
Nurse, nothing was capable of making
any Impression on her, whilst she apprehended
her young Mistress to be in Danger. 

‘The Doctor had now entered the
Room, and coming immediately up to
Amelia, after some Expressions of Surprize,
he took her by the Hand, called
her his little Sugar-plumb, and assured
her there were none but Friends present. 
He then led her tottering across the Room
to Mrs. Harris. Amelia then fell upon
her Knees before her Mother, but the
Doctor caught her up saying, “Use
that Posture, Child, only to the Almighty;” 
‘but I need not mention this
Singularity of his to you who know him
so well, and must have heard him often
dispute against addressing ourselves to
Man in the humblest Posture which we
use towards the Supreme Being. 
‘I will tire you with no more Particulars; 
we were soon satisfied that the
Doctor had reconciled all Matters with
Mrs. Harris, and we now proceeded directly
to Church, the Doctor having before
provided a Licence for us. 
‘But where is the strange Accident,’ 
cries Miss Mathews? ‘Sure you raised
more Curiosity than you have satisfied.’ 

‘Indeed, Madam, answered he, ‘your
Reproof is just; I had like to have
forgotten it; but you cannot wonder
at me when you reflect on that interesting
Part of my Story, which I am now
relating. —But before I mention this Accident,
I must tell you what happened
after Amelia's Escape from her Mother's
House. Mrs. Harris at first ran out into
the Lane among her Servants, and pursued
us (so she imagined) along the Road
leading to the Town; but that being
very dirty, and a violent Storm of Rain
coming, she took shelter in an Alehouse,
about half a Mile from her own House,
whither she sent for her Coach: She
then drove together with her Daughter
to Town; where soon after her Arrival,
she sent for the Doctor, her usual Privy
Counsellor in all her Affairs. They sat
up all Night together, the Doctor endeavouring
by Arguments and Persuasions
to bring Mrs. Harris to Reason; 
but all to no Purpose, tho', as he hath
informed me, Miss Betty seconded him
with the warmest Entreaties.’ 
Here Miss Mathews laughed; of which
Booth begging to know the Reason, she, at 

last, after many Apologies, said, ‘It was
the first good Thing she ever heard of Miss
Betty; nay, and,’ said she, ‘asking
your Pardon for my Opinion of your
Sister, since you will have it, I always
conceived her to be the deepest of Hypocrites.’ 
Booth fetched a Sigh, and said, he was
afraid she had not always acted so kindly;— 
and then after a little Hesitation proceeded. 
‘You will be pleased, Madam, to remember,
the Lad was sent with a verbal
Message to the Doctor; which Message
was no more than to acquaint him where
we were, and to desire the Favour of
his Company, or that he would send a
Coach to bring us to whatever Place he
would please to meet us at. This Message
was to be delivered to the Doctor
himself, and the Messenger was ordered,
if he found him not at home, to go to
him wherever he was. He fulfilled his
Orders, and told it to the Doctor in the
Presence of Mrs. Harris.’ 
‘Oh! the Idiot,’ cries Miss Mathews. 
‘Not at all,’ answered Booth: ‘He is a
very sensible Fellow, as you will, perhaps, 

say hereafter. He had not the
least Reason to suspect that any Secrecy
was necessary: For we took the utmost
Care he should not suspect it. —Well,
Madam, this Accident, which appeared
so unfortunate, turned in the highest
Degree to our Advantage. Mrs. Harris
no sooner heard the Message delivered,
than she fell into the most violent Passion
imaginable, and accused the Doctor of
being in the Plot, and of having confederated
with me in the Design of carrying
off her Daughter. 
‘The Doctor, who had hitherto used
only soothing Methods, now talked in a
different Strain. He confessed the Accusation,
and justified his Conduct. He said,
he was no Meddler in the Family-affairs of
others, nor should he have concerned himself
with hers, but at her own Request; 
but that since Mrs. Harris herself had made
him an Agent in this Matter, he would
take Care to acquit himself with Honour,
and above all things to preserve a young
Lady for whom he had the highest
Esteem;’ “for she is,” cries he, and by
Heavens he said true, “the most worthy,
generous, and noble of all human Beings.” 
‘You have yourself, Madam, said he, consented
to the Match. I have, with your 

Request, made the Match; and then he
added some Particulars relating to his
Opinion of me, which my Modesty forbids
me to repeat.’ —‘Nay, but,’ cries
Miss Mathews, ‘I insist on that Conquest
of your Modesty for once. —We Women
do not love to hear one another's Praises,
and I will be made amends by hearing
the Praises of a Man, and of a Man,
whom perhaps,’ added she with a Leer, ‘I
shall not, perhaps, think much the better
of upon that Account.’ —‘In Obedience
to your Commands then, Madam,’ continued
he, ‘the Doctor was so kind to say,
he had enquired into my Character, and
had found that I had been a dutiful Son,
and an affectionate Brother. Relations,
said he, in which, whoever discharges his
Duty well, gives us a well-grounded Hope,
that he will behave as properly in all the
rest. —He concluded with saying, that
Amelia's Happiness, her Heart, nay, her
very Reputation, were all concerned in
this Matter, to which, as he had been made
instrumental, he was resolved to carry her
thro' it; and then taking the Licence from
his Pocket, declared to Mrs. Harris that
he would go that Instant and marry her
Daughter wherever he found her. This
Speech, the Doctor's Voice, his Look, and 

his Behaviour, all which are sufficiently
calculated to inspire Awe, and even Terror,
when he pleases, frightened poor Mrs.
Harris, and wrought a more sensible Effect
than it was in his Power to produce by
all his Arguments and Entreaties; and I
have already related the Consequence
which soon after ensued. 
‘Thus the strange Accident of our
wanting Pen, Ink, and Paper, and our
not trusting the Boy with our Secret,
occasioned the Discovery to Mrs. Harris:
that Discovery put the Doctor upon his
Metal, and produced that blessed Event
which I have recounted to you, and
which, as my Mother hath since confessed,
nothing but the Spirit which he had
exerted after the Discovery, could have
brought about. 
‘Well, Madam, you now see me married
to Amelia; in which Situation you
will, perhaps, think my Happiness incapable
of Addition. Perhaps it was so; 
and yet I can with Truth say, that the
Love which I then bore Amelia was not
comparable to what I bear her now.’ 
‘Happy Amelia!’ cried Miss Mathews. 
‘If all Men were like you, all Women 

would be blessed; nay the whole World
would be so in a great Measure: for upon
my Soul, I believe that from the
damned Inconstancy of your Sex to ours
proceeds half the Miseries of Mankind.’ 
That we may give the Reader some
Leisure to consider well the foregoing Sentiment,
we will here put an End to this
Chapter. 



In which our Readers will probably be divided
in their Opinion of Mr. Booth's Conduct. 
Booth proceeded as follows: 
‘The first Months of our Marriage
produced nothing remarkable enough to
mention. I am sure I need not tell Miss
Mathews that I found in my Amelia every
Perfection of human Nature. Mrs. Harris
at first gave us some little Uneasiness. 
She had rather yielded to the Doctor than
given a willing Consent to the Match; 
however, by Degrees, she became more
and more satisfied, and at last seemed
perfectly reconciled. This we ascribed a
good deal to the kind Offices of Miss 

Betty, who had always appeared to be
my Friend. She had been greatly assisting
to Amelia in making her Escape,
which I had no Opportunity of mentioning
to you before, and in all things behaved
so well, outwardly at least, to myself
as well as her Sister, that we regarded
her as our sincerest Friend. 
‘About half a-Year after our Marriage,
two additional Companies were added to
our Regiment, in one of which I was
preferred to the Command of a Lieutenant. 
Upon this Occasion Miss Betty
gave the first Intimation of a Disposition
which we have since too severely experienced.’ 
‘Your Servant, Sir,’ says Miss Mathews,
‘then I find I was not mistaken in
my Opinion of the Lady. —No, no, shew
me any Goodness in a censorious Prude
and’— 
As Miss Mathews hesitated for a Simile
Booth proceeded. ‘You will please to remember,
Madam, there was formerly an
Agreement between myself and Mrs. Harris,
that I should settle all my Amelia's Fortune
on her, except a certain Sum, which 

was to be laid out in my Advancement
in the Army; but as our Marriage was
carried on in the Manner you have heard,
no such Agreement was ever executed. 
And since I was become Amelia's Husband,
not a Word of this Matter was ever
mentioned by the old Lady; and as for
myself, I declare I had not yet awakened
from that delicious Dream of Bliss in
which the Possession of Amelia had lulled
me.’ 
Here Miss Mathews sighed, and cast the
tenderest of Looks on Booth, who thus
continued his Story. 
‘Soon after my Promotion, Mrs. Harris
one Morning took an Occasion to
speak to me on this Affair. She said,
that as I had been promoted Gratis to a
Lieutenancy, she would assist me with
Money to carry me yet a Step higher; 
and if more was required than was formerly
mentioned, it should not be wanting,
since she was so perfectly satisfied
with my Behaviour to her Daughter. 
Adding, that she hoped I had still the
same Inclination to settle on my Wife
the Remainder of her Fortune. 

‘I answered with very warm Acknowledgments
of my Mother's Goodness,
and declared, if I had the World I was
ready to lay it at my Amelia's Feet. — 
And so, Heaven knows, I would ten
thousand Worlds. 
‘Mrs. Harris seemed pleased with the
Warmth of my Sentiments, and said
she would immediately send to her Lawyer
and give him the necessary Orders; 
and thus ended our Conversation on this
Subject. 
‘From this time there was a very visible
Alteration in Miss Betty's Behaviour. 
She grew reserved to her Sister as well as
to me. She was fretful and captious on
the slightest Occasion; nay she affected
much to talk on the ill Consequences of
an imprudent Marriage, especially before
her Mother; and if ever any little Tenderness
or Endearments escaped me in
public towards Amelia, she never failed
to make some malicious Remark on the
short Duration of violent Passions; and
when I have expressed a fond Sentiment
for my Wife, her Sister would kindly 

wish she might hear as much seven Years
hence. 
‘All these Matters have been since suggested
to us by Reflection: for while
they actually past, both Amelia and myself
had our Thoughts too happily engaged
to take any or much Notice of what discovered
itself in the Mind of any other
Person. 
‘Unfortunately for us, Mrs. Harris's
Lawyer happened at this time to be at
London, where Business detained him upwards
of a Month; and as Mrs. Harris
would on no Occasion employ any other,
our Affair was under an entire Suspension
till his Return. 
‘Amelia, who was now big with Child,
had often expressed the deepest Concern
at her Apprehensions of my being sometime
commanded abroad, a Circumstance
which she declared, if it should ever
happen to her, even tho' she should not
then be in the same Situation as at present,
would infallibly break her Heart. These
Remonstrances were made with such
Tenderness, and so much affected me,
that to avoid any Probability of such an 

Event, I endeavoured to get an Exchange
into the Horse-guards, a Body
of Troops which very rarely goes abroad
unless where the King himself commands
in Person. I soon found an Officer for
my Purpose, the Terms were agreed on,
and Mrs. Harris had ordered the Money
which I was to pay to be ready, notwithstanding
the Opposition made by Miss
Betty, who openly dissuaded her Mother
from it; alledging that the Exchange was
highly to my Disadvantage; that I could
never hope to rise in the Army after it; 
not forgetting, at the same time, some
Insinuations very prejudicial to my Reputation
as a Soldier. 
‘When every thing was agreed on, and
the two Commissions were actually made
out, but not signed by the King, one
Day, at my Return from hunting, Amelia
flew to me, and eagerly embracing
me, cried out, “O Billy, I have
News for you, which delights my
Soul. Nothing sure was ever so fortunate
as the Exchange you have made. 
The Regiment you was formerly in is
ordered for Gibraltar.” 
‘I received this News with far less
Transport than it was delivered. I answered 

coldly, since the Case was so, I
heartily hoped the Commissions might
be both signed. What do you say, replied
Amelia eagerly,—Sure you told me every
thing was entirely settled. That Look of
yours frightens me to Death. —But I am
running into too minute Particulars. In
short, I received a Letter by that very
Post, from the Officer with whom I had
exchanged, insisting that tho' his Majesty
had not signed the Commissions, still that
the Bargain was valid, and partly urging it
as a Right, and partly desiring it as a Favour,
that he might go to Gibraltar in my
Room. 
‘This Letter convinced me in every
Point. I was now informed that the
Commissions were not signed, and consequently
that the Exchange was not
compleated. Of Consequence the other
could have no Right to insist on going; 
and as for granting him such a Favour, I
too clearly saw I must do it at the Expence
of my Honour. I was now reduced
to a Dilemma, the most dreadful
which I think any Man can experience; 
in which I am not ashamed to own, I
found Love was not so over-matched by
Honour as he ought to have been. The 

Thoughts of leaving Amelia, in her present
Condition, to Misery, perhaps to
Death or Madness, were insupportable; 
nor could any other Consideration but
that, which now tormented me on the
other Side, have combated them a Moment.’ 
‘No Woman upon Earth,’ cries Miss
Mathews, ‘can despise Want of Spirit
in a Man more than myself; and yet I
cannot help thinking you was rather too
nice on this Occasion.’ 
‘You will allow, Madam,’ answered
Booth, ‘that whoever offends against the
Laws of Honour in the least Instance, is
treated as the highest Delinquent. Here
is no Excuse, no Pardon; and he doth
nothing who leaves any thing undone. 
But if the Conflict was so terrible with
myself alone, what was my Situation in
the Presence of Amelia? How could I
support her Sighs, her Tears, her Agonies,
her Despair! Could I bear to think
myself the cruel Cause of her Sufferings,
for so I was! Could I endure the Thought
of having it in my Power to give her
instant Relief, for so it was, and refuse it
her! 

‘Miss Betty was now again become my
Friend. She had scarce been civil to me
for a Fortnight last past, yet now she
commended me to the Skies, and as severely
blamed her Sister, whom she arraigned
of the most contemptible Weakness,
in preferring my Safety to my Honour:
she said many ill-natured Things
on the Occasion, which I shall not now
repeat. 
‘In the Midst of this Hurricane the
good Doctor came to dine with Mrs.
Harris, and at my Desire delivered his
Opinion on the Matter.’ 
Here Mr. Booth was interrupted in his
Narrative, by the Arrival of a Person
whom we shall introduce in the next
Chapter. 




Containing a Scene of a different Kind from
any of the preceding. 
The Gentleman who now arrived was
the Keeper; or if you please, (for
so he pleased to call himself) the Governor
of the Prison. 
He used so little Ceremony at his Approach,
that the Bolt, which was very
slight on the Inside, gave way, and the
Door immediately flew open. He had
no sooner entered the Room than he acquainted
Miss Mathews that he had brought
her very good News, for which he demanded
a Bottle of Wine, as his Due. 
This Demand being complied with, he
acquainted Miss Mathews that the wounded
Gentleman was not dead, nor was his
Wound thought to be mortal: That Loss
of Blood, and, perhaps, his Fright had
occasioned his fainting away; ‘but I believe,
Madam,’ said he, ‘if you take the
proper Measures, you may be bailed Tomorrow. 
I expect the Lawyer here this
Evening, and if you put the Business into 

his Hands, I warrant it will be done. 
Money to be sure must be parted with,
that's to be sure. People to be sure will
expect to touch a little in such Cases. 
For my own Part, I never desire to keep
a Prisoner longer than the Law allows,
not I: I always inform them they can
be bailed as soon as I know it. I never
make any Bargain, not I; I always love
to leave those Things to the Gentlemen
and Ladies themselves. I never suspect
Gentlemen and Ladies of wanting Generosity.’ 
Miss Mathews made a very slight Answer
to all these friendly Professions. She said
she had done nothing she repented of, and
was indifferent as to the Event. ‘All I
can say,’ cries she, ‘is, that if the Wretch
is alive, there is no greater Villain in
Life than himself;’ and instead of mentioning
any thing of the Bail, she begged
the Keeper to leave her again alone with
Mr. Booth. The Keeper replied, ‘Nay,
Madam, perhaps it may be better to stay
a little longer here, if you have not Bail
ready, than to buy them too dear. Besides,
a Day or two hence, when the
Gentleman is past all Danger of Recovery,
to be sure some Folks that would 

expect an extraordinary Fee now, can't
expect to touch any thing. And to be
sure you shall want nothing here. The
best of all things are to be had here for
Money, both eatable and drinkable; tho'
I say it, I shan't turn my Back to any of the
Taverns for either Eatables or Wind. The
Captain there need not have been so shy
of owning himself when he first came in; 
we have had Captains and other great Gentlemen
here before now; and no shame to
them, tho' I say it. Many a great Gentleman
is sometimes found in Places that
don't become them half so well, let me
tell them that, Captain Booth, let me
tell them that.’ 
‘I see, Sir,’ answered Booth, a little discomposed,
‘that you are acquainted with
my Title as well as my Name.’ 
‘Ay, Sir,’ cries the Keeper, ‘and I
honour you the more for it. I love the
Gentlemen of the Army. I was in the
Army myself formerly; in the Lord of
Oxford's Horse. It is true I rode private; 
but I had Money enough to have
bought in Quarter-Master, when I took
it into my Head to marry, and my Wife
she did not like that I should continue a 

Soldier, she was all for a private Life; 
and so I came to this Business.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Sir,’ answered Booth,
‘you consulted your Wife's Inclinations
very notably; but pray, will you satisfy my
Curiosity in telling me how you became
acquainted that I was in the Army? For
my Dress, I think, could not betray me.’ 
‘Betray!’ replied the Keeper. ‘There
is no betraying here, I hope—I am not
a Person to betray People. —But you are
so shy and peery, you would almost
make one suspect there was more in the
Matter. And if there be, I promise you,
you need not be afraid of telling it
me. You will excuse me giving you a
Hint; but the sooner the better, that's
all. Others may be before-hand with
you, and first come first serv'd on these
Occasions, that's all. Informers are
odious, there's no doubt of that, and no
one would care to be an Informer if he
could help it, because of the ill Usage
they always receive from the Mob; yet it
is dangerous to trust too much; and when
Safety and a good Part of the Reward too
are on one Side, and the Gallows on the 

other—I know which a wise Man would
chuse.’ 
‘What the Devil do you mean by all
this?’ cries Booth. 
‘No Offence, I hope,’ answered the
Keeper; ‘I speak for your Good, and if
you have been upon the snaffling Lay— 
you understand me, I'm sure.’ 
‘Not I,’ answered Booth, ‘upon my
Honour.’ 
‘Nay, nay,’ replied the Keeper, with
a contemptuous Sneer, ‘if you are so
peery as that comes to, you must take
the Consequence. —But for my Part, I
know I would not trust Robinson with
Two-Pence untold.’ 
‘What do you mean,’ cries Booth? 
‘Who is Robinson?’ 
‘And you don't know Robinson!’ answered
the Keeper with great Emotion. To
which Booth replying in the Negative; the
Keeper, after some silent Tokens of Amazement,
cried out; ‘Well, Captain, I
must say you are the best at it, of all 

the Gentlemen I ever saw. However,
I will tell you this: The Lawyer and
Mr. Robinson have been laying their
Heads together about you above half an
Hour this Afternoon. I overheard them
mention Captain Booth, several Times; 
and for my Part, I would not answer
that Mr. Murphy is not now gone
about the Business; but if you will impeach
any to me of the Road, or any
thing else, I will step away to his Worship
Thrasher this Instant, and I am sure
I have Interest enough with him to get
you admitted an Evidence.’ 
‘And so,’ cries ‘Booth, you really take
me for a Highwayman.’ 
‘No Offence, Captain, I hope,’ said
the Keeper: ‘As Times go, there are many
worse Men in the World than those. 
Gentlemen may be driven to Distress,
and when they are, I know no more
genteeler Way than the Road. It hath
been many a brave Man's Case, to my
Knowledge, and Men of as much Honour
too as any in the World.’ 

‘Well, Sir,’ said Booth, ‘I assure you
I am not that Gentleman of Honour you
imagine me.’ 
Miss Mathews, who had long understood
the Keeper no better than Mr. Booth, no
sooner heard his Meaning explained, than
she was fired with greater Indignation than
the Gentleman had expressed. ‘How
dare you, Sir,’ said she to the Keeper,
‘insult a Man of Fashion, and who hath
had the Honour to bear his Majesty's
Commission in the Army, as you yourself
own you know. If his Misfortunes
have sent him hither, sure we have no
Laws that will protect such a Fellow as
you in insulting him.’ ‘Fellow!’ mutter'd
the Keeper—‘I would not advise
you, Madam, to use such Language to
me.’ —‘Do you dare threaten me,’ reply'd
Miss Mathews in a Rage; ‘Venture
in the least Instance to exceed your Authority,
with Regard to me, and I will
prosecute you with the utmost Vengeance.’ 
A Scene of very high Altercation now
ensued, till Booth interposed, and quieted
the Keeper, who was, perhaps, enough inclined 

to an Accommodation; for, in
Truth, he waged unequal War. He was
besides unwilling to incense Miss Mathews,
whom he expected to be bailed out the
next Day, and who had more Money left
than he intended she should carry out of
the Prison with her; and as for any violent
or unjustifiable Methods, the Lady had
discovered much too great a Spirit to be
in Danger of them. The Governor therefore,
in a very gentle Tone, declared, that
if he had given any Offence to the Gentleman,
he heartily asked his Pardon: That
if he had known him to be really a Captain,
he should not have entertained any
such Suspicions; but that Captain was a
very common Title in that Place, and belonged
to several Gentlemen that had never
been in the Army, or at most had rid
private like himself. ‘To be sure, Captain,’ 
said he, ‘as you yourself own,
your Dress is not very military;’ (for he
had on a plain Fustian Suit) ‘and besides,
as the Lawyer says, Noscitur a sosir is a
very good Rule. And I don't believe
there is a greater Rascal upon Earth than
that same Robinson that I was talking of. 
Nay, I assure you, I wish there may be
no Mischief hatching against you. But
if there is, I will do all I can with the 

Lawyer to prevent it. To be sure Mr.
Murphy is one of the cleverest Men in
the World at the Law: That even his
Enemies must own; and as I recommend
him to all the Business I can, (and it is
not a little to be sure that arises in this
Place) why, one good Turn deserves another. 
And I may expect that he will not
be concerned in any Plot to ruin any
Friend of mine; at least, when I desire
him not. I am sure he could not be an
honest Man if he would.’ 
Booth was then satisfied that Mr. Robinson,
whom he did not yet know by Name,
was the Gamester who had won his Money
at Play. And now, Miss Mathews, who
had very impatiently borne this long Interruption,
prevailed on the Keeper to withdraw. 
As soon as he was gone, Mr. Booth
began to felicitate her upon the News of
the wounded Gentleman being in a fair
Likelihood of Recovery. To which, after
a short Silence, she answered, ‘There is
something, perhaps, which you will not
easily guess, that makes your Congratulations
more agreeable to me than the
first Account I heard of the Villain's
having escaped the Fate he deserves: For,
I do assure you, at first, it did not make 

me Amends for the Interruption of my
Curiosity. Now, I hope, we shall be
disturbed no more, till you have finish'd
your whole Story. —You left off, I think,
somewhere in the Struggle about leaving
Amelia, the happy Amelia.’ —‘And
can
you call her happy at such a Period,’ 
cries Booth? ‘Happy, ay happy, in any
Situation,’ answer'd Miss Mathews, ‘with
such a Husband. I, at least, may well
think so, who have experienced the very
Reverse of her Fortune; but I was not
born to be happy. I may say with the
Poet: 

‘The blackest Ink of Fate was sure my Lot,
‘And when Fate writ my Name, it made a Blot.
‘Nay, nay, dear Miss Mathews,’ answered
Booth, ‘you must, and shall banish
such gloomy Thoughts. Fate hath, I
hope, many happy Days in Store for
you’. —‘Do you believe it, Mr. Booth,’ 
replied she, ‘indeed you know the contrary
—You must know—For you can't
have forgot. No Amelia in the World
can have quite obliterated—Forgetfulness
is not in our own Power. If it
was, indeed, I have Reason to think— 

But I know not what I am saying. –––Pray,
do proceed in that Story.’ 
Booth so immediately complied with this
Request, that it is possible he was pleased
with it. To say the Truth, if all which
unwittingly dropt from Miss Matthews was
put together, some Conclusions might, it
seems, be drawn from the whole, which
could not convey a very agreeable Idea to
a constant Husband. Booth therefore proceeded
to relate what is written in the Third
Book of this History. 