




The great Value of a new Acquisition of
Company, in the Decay of a Season, at
a public Place, to the Followers of gay
Diversions. 
Lady Dellwyn's Beauty reigned
now almost unrivalled on the very
Pinacle of Admiration: She
could almost say her utmost Wish was
accomplished. Whenever she graced
an Assembly, she engrossed the Eyes
of all Beholders, received them Homage 

as due Incense; and was herself
equally pleased with them all. 

Beaux drive out Beaux, as Coaches Coaches drive* .
But such is the Fate of the highest human
Pleasures, as continually to exemplify
the Truth of the Observation,
That, 

Were our State as we would chuse it,
We should be unhappy with Fear to lose it† .
For now the visible Appearance of the
Season's approaching End began to fill
Lady Dellwyn with melancholy and
dismal Apprehensions; for her Lord
had positively declared his Intention
of returning directly to his own Castle
from Bristol, as soon as he should be
able to travel; so that her Ladyship
despaired of following the Bent of her
own Inclinations, which would have 

led her first to Bath, during the Height
of the Season there, and then, before
the Meeting of the Parliament, to have
joined the Company in London. She
therefore greatly rejoiced in every new
Acquisition of Company; and the Information
of the Arrival of Lady Fanny
Chlegen filled her with much Pleasure. 
Lady Fanny was indisposed after her
Journey, and could not immediately
appear in Public; but the Moment
Lady Dellwyn beheld her, she was
surprised to find in the new-arrived
Lady her old Friend Lady Fanny Fashion. 
She had been informed, that
her apprehended Rival, whose Coquetry
was the principal Instrument
towards obtaining her Consent to become
Countess of Dellwyn, was since
married herself; but that the present
Lady Fanny was so, she had never heard
the least Intimation. 
Mr. Chlegen indeed accompanied his
Lady to Bristol, but was so absorbed 

in her dazling Lustre, that he was seldom
mentioned. Company dined with
Lady Fanny: Parties were made to
ride—walk—play at Cards, with Lady
Fanny; but her Husband seemed in
a State of Annihilation: And so much
Resemblance did her bear to a Ghost,
that, altho' present, he was invisible,
and unobserved by any of the Company. 
Unless some odd Man, who sat
near him at the Bottom of the Table,
thought it proper to acknowlege the
Master of the House, like the Ghost of
Banquo, he might imperceptibly appear
or vanish as often as he pleased, whilst
the Lady, like Lady Macbeth, 

Still kept her Seat,
and her State also. 
A short Sketch of Mr. Chlegen's
Character seems to demand a Place
here, lest the Reader should be led into
a Mistake, and imagine, that he was 

really too insignificant to deserve any
further Notice. 
Mr. Chlegen was about the Age of
Twenty-eight; his Person well-proportioned,
rather inclined to tall; his
Countenance was manly, without the
least Mixture of Roughness; and his
Eyes were penetrating, without darting-forth
any Degree of Fierceness. 
He had had a liberal Education, and
improved his Time to the best Advantage: 
His Heart was humane; he was
a good Christian in Principle, and kept
up in Practice (as far as human Frailties
will admit) to the Religion he professed. 
Such was the general Character
of the Man who was overlooked— 
by all such Persons as were the very
Reverse of Mr. Chlegen. As to Lady
Fanny, he married her because he loved
her. He had Fortune enough to permit
him reasonably to please himself; 
and altho' Lady Fanny's Disposition
was somewhat gayer than what he
wished, yet he flattered himself that 

she had a sufficient Stock of good Sense
at the Bottom to become an agreeable,
domestic, chearful Companion, when
the Flights of Youth were a little evaporated. 
The largest Share of human
Understanding is often insufficient to
prevent either a Man or Woman from
giving too great Liberty to the Imagination,
and bestowing a partial Opinion
on the Object of their Choice. 
Besides, Lady Fanny, whilst Mr. Chlegen
was her Lover, had shewn so visible
a Preference of his Company to
all other Diversions, as appeared to
him to lay a solid Foundation for his
Hopes; and he had then pictured to
himself various Scenes of mutual Happiness,
in which Inventions for her
Indulgence always made the principal
Part; and when he was married to
her, he failed not to use his utmost
Endeavours to make her happy. Such
was his Tenderness for her, that what
Hamlet says of his Father, might be
justly applied to him; 


—so loving to my Mother,
That he would not let e'en the Winds of Heav'n
Visit her Face too roughly.—
And when he perceived, that she delighted
more in the Pursuit of public
Pleasures, and gay Diversions, than
was suitable to his Inclinations, even
to them he accompanied her for her
Indulgence; but still cherishing the
Hopes that she could not long continue
this Taste, but must, of herself, grow
weary of a constant Round of the same
Manner of wasting her Time; for he
could not conceive the Possibility of
continuing resolutely in a Pursuit,
which, he was well satisfied, was perfectly
incapable of yielding any solid
Pleasure. 




The old Fable of the Fox, who declared
the Grapes were sour when he could
not come at them, exemplified: Or a
sudden joyful Acceptance of what was
the Moment before contemptible. 
The Two Ladies, as soon as they
distinguished each other, met
with all the reciprocal Joy that could
be expressed by Two Friends, who
had been long separated. Had Lady
Dellwyn met with this Rival in her
Lord's Affections while she was confined
to his Castle, and imagined herself
the most miserable of human Creatures
by becoming his Wife, she could
not, perhaps, have forborne stretching
herself up into a sort of Posture of Defiance; 
her Eyes might have darted
forth the Warmth of Resentment, and
her Words have indicated Anger as
plainly, altho' in a different Language 

from that used by the Vulgar to vent
their Indignation. It is observeable,
that when Ladies are angry, they encrease
the Number of their Gestures; 
their Motions become quick and sudden; 
but they contract the Number
of their Words, as if they esteemed
them too valuable to be bestowed on
such Persons as have offended them: 
Whence, I suppose, to give a short
Answer is become a synonymous Term
with giving an angry Answer; whereas
the common People have a remarkable
Volubility of Tongue when they
would shew their Resentment. 
Lady Dellwyn was now in the Midst
of general Admiration; the Means
therefore of her shining in Public were
joyous to her Heart, and would not
suffer the least Spark of Indignation to
arise against Lady Fanny, who had, in
a great Degree, contributed to her present
Happiness. 

Lady Fanny Chlegen had suffered
many mortifying Apprehensions during
her Journey, for fear the Company,
from whom she expected full as salutary
an Effect as from the Waters,
should be dispersed before her Arrival; 
and therefore esteemed every Person to
be valuable, who had the accidental
Merit of making an additional Figure
in the Rooms; but a Woman of Quality,
at the latter End of a Season, was
estimable indeed; and Lady Dellwyn
was a more particular Pleasure than
she expected, insomuch that if she
had rivaled her in a favourite Lap-Dog,
or any other Thing of equal
Consequence, in all Probability Lady
Fanny would have forgiven her, or, at
least, have postponed her Resentment
to a more convenient Opportunity,
when Lady Dellwyn might happen to
be less necessary to her Pleasures. 
It is natural and customary for Persons
of the same Rank to range themselves
in the same Party; Lady Dellwyn 

and Lady Fanny were then the
chief Supporters of that Company,
which is often distinguished by the
Name of the Quality Set; not at all so
by themselves; perhaps very few of
them ever heard the Expression; and
as it is never used before them, it looks
as if there was something invidious
lurked under it: But if it never came
from the Mouth of any other than the
acknowleged Vulgar, it should not be
here remembered. But the Case is far
otherwise; it is more general than can
well be imagined, and the Design
seems to be, to declare a Contempt for
being admitted into that particular
Party; which Contempt they endeavour
to prove, by letting their Thoughts,
or at least their Conversation, continually
dwell on that Subject. 
A Lady, whose Eyes constantly
rolled to that End of the Room where
this Company generally sat, was one
Evening more eloquent than usual in
declaring, and endeavouring to prove 

that she had no Inclination to be amongst
the People of Quality—she was much
better pleased with her own little Party
—and many other Expressions of the
like Import she was uttering as fast as
possible, when Lady Fanny Chlegen
accosted her, and desired the Favour
that she would make one of their Party,
because they had been disappointed of
one of their Company. 
The Lady's Eloquence was immediately
silenced: She walked up the
Room with Lady Fanny, turning her
Eyes quick from one Side to the other,
repeatedly curt'seying all the Way to
every one whose Regard she could
catch, till she joined her present Company. 
During the Evening, she sometimes
looked back on the Party she
had left, with a View only of discovering
whether or no they paid due
Attention to her happy Situation. Such
Revolutions do a few Moments cause
in the human Mind! This Accident,
in one Instance, seemed to have the 

same melancholy Effect with a Stroke
of the Palsy; for the poor Lady's Memory
was so greatly weakened by it,
that she totally forgot all her former
Acquaintance, and was seized with a
Giddiness in her Head, which robbed
her of all her Steadiness. Her Eyes
seemed to have taken a sudden Aversion
to look downwards, insomuch
that she scarcely observed the Paths in
which she walked enough to preserve
her from the Danger of falling. 
An Assembly of Company, where
Lady &wblank; was introduced as a Subject
of Conversation, were all so intimately
acquainted with her Ladyship,
that they were not ignorant of any the
least Bent of her Disposition; and, had
they been Painters, they could certainly
have drawn her Picture by Memory
only; but unfortunately the Lady
at that Instant passed by; which
being mentioned by a Gentleman, who
was indeed the only Person in the
Room who really knew Lady &wblank; by 

Sight, the whole Company crouded
earnestly to the Window, to discover
which was the Lady, of whose most
particular Notice they had but the Moment
before boasted; and so far had
their Imagination soared out of the
Reach of their Government, that,
whilst they were elated with the
Thoughts of making believe they had
the Honour of Lady &wblank;'s Acquaintance,
they never reflected on their own
strange Appearance, to which they
seemed totally insensible. 




The quick Transition from joyous Rapture
to mournful Sorrow, in the celebrated
Game of Coquetry. 
Lady Dellwyn's Joy on this new
Acquisition of Company was at
first very great; but it was soon abated,
and then intirely lost, by the Mortification
of having a powerful Rival of
her Beauty. A divided Empire is seldom
satisfactory to a Mind exulting in
absolute Dominion. Arbitrary Power,
however hateful to the Persons who
are subjected to it, doth not often fail
of pleasing its Possessor; for who can
say to Ambition, Thus far shalt thou
extend thy Desires, but no farther? 
Lady Dellwyn had full as much Reason
to call Lady Fanny her evil Genius,
as ever Mark Anthony had to 

give that Denomination to Cæsar. 
Neither Lady Dellwyn or the Roman
Emperor chose to search for their evil
Genius in the only Place where it was
constantly to be found, namely, in
their own Bosoms; and therefore were
driven to seek in outward Objects for
that which sat closely concealed at
home. 
A conscious Dignity shone through
every Gesture of Lady Fanny; a peculiar
and expressive Toss of her Head
positively declared to her Beholders,
that she claimed their Admiration; 
and left a polite or gallant Man no
Power of refusing her Ladyship what
she thus demanded as her Due. 

She look'd a Goddess, and she mov'd a Queen.
She was in Possession of the whole
Art of displaying every Charm in its
fullest Lustre; and as it is said of good
Managers, that they make a genteel
Appearance without any great Substance, 

so Lady Fanny made the most
of every native Excellence; but in real
Beauty Lady Dellwyn far exceeded her. 
In true Wit also Lady Dellwyn had
greatly the Advantage; but Lady
Fanny could turn the comic, or rather
the farcical, Side of any Subject to a
much fuller View. Her Power of Ridicule
was superior both in Words
and Motions; a sudden Casting up of
the Eyes, or a judicious Shrug of the
Shoulders, often expressing as great a
Discovery of the Ridiculous as any
Language can utter. Besides, Lady
Dellwyn laboured under the Disadvantage
of yet retaining some Degrees of
Bashfulness; Pertness, and Self-sufficiency
could at any time put her out of
Countenance, even when those Two
Qualities were all the Merit her Opponents
could justly boast; a Misfortune
which is ever a great Baulk to the Exertion
of the Faculties in Wit and Humour. 

The Loss of an Admirer, tho' in
himself ever so insignificant, was as
sensible a Mortification to Lady Dellwyn,
as the losing a Branch of Power
can be to the most ambitious Hero; 
and her Ladyship was now often driven
to the Necessity of Coquetting it with
Men, on whom she would scarcely
have condescended to have cast one
Glance before the Arrival of Lady
Fanny Chlegen; and by turns she imagined,
that she found something agreeable
in almost every Man with whom
she conversed. She had now lost the
Niceness of examining the Merit of her
Admirers; and, like Lord Foppington,
she considered the Beauty of the Tip
of an Ear as an Object worthy her
Regard; for an applauding Smile,
nay, even the least Simper, which
Lady Fanny condescended to bestow
on any Man, was full sufficient to engage
Lady Dellwyn in the Practice of
every Stratagem to disappoint Lady
Fanny, and fix such a Conquest her
own. 

Sir Harry Cleveland found most Sympathy
in Lady Fanny in the Art of
Humbugging which he professed,
more Power of discovering sufficient
Cause for loud Laughter—out of nothing; 
and therefore generally connected
himself with her Train of Followers. 
This was a sensible Disappointment
to Lady Dellwyn, because
she seemed more particularly to exert
all her Endeavours to obtain his Admiration. 
Mr. Stratam, as his principal View
was only to gain such an Admittance
amongst the constant Attendants on the
most fashionable Beauty, as might raise
a Conjecture that he was acceptable in
her Sight, was always to be seen
where 

Beauty calls, and Fashion leads the Way;
and consequently was never absent
from the most populous Haunts. 

The Multitude, the Echoes of the
Language used by the greatest Number,
who glean up such Phrases as
Bon-mots, Bon-tons, and toss them
about promiscuously, (whether with or
without any Meaning being a Matter
of total Indifference), are certainly to
be found in Herds wheresoever they are
led by the Person, whom, by some
Accident, they discover to be most
worthy of Imitation, which at that
time happened to be Sir Harry Cleveland. 
They are to be described only
by Negatives. It would be difficult to
discover what Qualities they have; but
it is easy to know what they have not; 
and to them is strictly applicable what
the Poet says of Women, that 

They have no Character at all* .
They resemble a Field of Corn, where
every single Ear bends the same Way,
even as the Wind driveth. Such is a
Multitude of Fashion-mongers, who 

labour for nothing but to find out
which Affectation they shall next aspire
servilely to imitate. 
Captain Drumond now was singular
in his stedfast Attachment to Lady
Dellwyn; but unfortunately he was the
only Man amongst all the Company,
whom she could not bring herself by
any means to be pleased with: For
Lady Fanny never condescended even
to use the least Endeavours to gain his
Attention, but, on the contrary, singled
him out as a fit Object for nothing
more than pointed Jests and sneering
Ridicule; and never called him by any
other Name than that of the Mountebank,
who was continually ascending
the Stage to puss off his own Merits: 
And neither of the Ladies were greatly
entertained at his constant Practice of
trumpetting forth his own Commendations,
as there was another Person,
whose Praises either of them would
much rather have made the Subject of
their Contemplation. 

No Two Competitors for lucrative
Employments could possibly be more
assiduous in their Pursuit, have clearer
Views of each other's Imperfections,
or be more openly complaisant or polite
to each other, than were Lady Dellwyn
and Lady Fanny Chlegen; they delighted
to be together, the former, lest
she should be too melancholy and solitary,
and the latter, from the Encrease
of her Triumph by Lady Dellwyn's
Presence. 
It would, perhaps, be a whimsical
Inquiry to search into the first Rise of
many Attachments, which appear,
during their Season, very firmly fixed. 
By looking a little farther than meer
Outside, we might behold one Lady
driven on, as by Impulse, to her Choice
by the Fear of lessening her Dignity,
if she is not connected with the highest
Rank in the Company. Another is
actuated with the Hope of raising her
own Dignity by the Notice of her Superiors
in Station, and contrives to 

assume to herself Honour by touching
the Garment of high Station. A Third
condescends in her Familiarity, with
the desireable View of rendering her
Smiles or Frowns of Consequence. A
Fourth frequents the Place where Lovers
are to be found, altho' she hath
no Share in either their Love or Admiration; 
and is thoroughly satisfied with
reporting to her other Acquaintance,
that she hath been so happy as to be in
Parties with such gallant Men; but
gives the Hearers full Liberty of imagining
that she was not without her
Share of Addresses. Some are obliged
to be contented with being only present
at Triumphs; whilst others exult
in enjoying them. To number all the
various little Motives to these apparent
Connexions would be an impossible
Task; for they are often composed of
such slender Materials, as are all dissolved,
and no more to be seen, by the
Time they become perceptible to the
most curious Observer. 




The comfortable State of a human Mind,
whose tumultuous Passions are all
alarmed by the Disappointment of
Vanity. 
Lady Dellwyn was now almost
in as great a State of Mortification
as at the Time that Lady Fanny,
by becoming her Rival in her Lord's
Fortune and Title, first led her to discover,
that such Advantages were
worth the Price she afterwards paid for
them, when an Accident happened,
which was the highest Cordial to her
almost fainting Spirits, and revived the
pleasing Hope of obtaining a complete
Triumph over Lady Fanny; for Lord
Clermont returned to the Hot Wells, and
she doubted not but that it was in her
Power easily to regain his Attention. 

And now if any able Muse would
kindly attend my Call, I would entreat
the Favour of her to sing the Lady
tossed about by adverse Fate through
all the full-blown Tempest of labouring
and tumultuous Passions. If there were
any reasonable Hopes of Success, I would
make an Effort to allure such Assistance
by melodious Verse; but as those Ladies
have been long out of Fashion,
and would be deaf to all my Supplications,
I must proceed in humble Prose. 
The First Evening Lord Clermont
appeared in Public, each of the Rival
Ladies was fully determined to boast
such a noble Conquest. 
Lady Fanny Chlegen, whose Countenance
rather indicated Dignity than
Gentleness, had that Day spent a
longer Time than usual at her Toilette,
practising every Art to adorn her
Charms with an uncommon Softness,
which was all played off at Lord Clermont. 
On the contrary, Lady Dellwyn, 

whose Countenance denoted an
inimitable Sweetness, endeavoured to
heighten her Beauties by all the Vivacity
she was Mistress of; and her Eyes
darted all their Lustre at Lord Clermont. 
To every curious Observer of
Nature, it was remarkable with what
an Exactness each performed her Part,
whilst she was animated with the
Hopes of Success. But every Disappointment
had a very different Effect; 
for on every Gallantry or peculiar Attention
offered by Lord Clermont to
Lady Fanny, Lady Dellwyn's Eyes lost
their Fire, and a melancholy Languor
overspread her whole Face. But when
Lady Fanny perceived any Preference
of her Rival in Lord Clermont's Behaviour,
her native Dignity came to her
Assistance; and a peculiar Drawing-up
of her Upper-lip, with a supercilious
Contraction of her Eyebrow, indicated
Scorn and Contempt. She reversed
the Picture of the Ghost in
Hamlet, of whom Horatio says, that
he had 


 A Countenance more in Sorrow than in Anger;
for her Looks rather shewed her filled
with Indignation than Grief. When
their Fears were alarmed, Nature returned; 
and her buffoon Mimic, Art,
was thrown out of her Play, and entirely
baffled: But Words are not adequate
to describe the tragic Scene that
was passing within Lady Dellwyn's Bosom,
when Lord Clermont, making her
a formal Bow, presented his Hand with
great Respect to lead Lady Fanny to her
Chair. Her Ladyship failed not on this
Occasion to put on the most triumphant
Air; for she could very intelligibly,
without the Utterance of one Word,
express the Exultation of her Heart,
and give an additional Pain to that of
her already truly-mortified Rival. 
Lord Clermont himself returned no
more that Evening into the Assembly. 
Lady Dellwyn stood for some Time as 

In a Dream, and was as motionless as a
Statue, whilst Capt. Drumond eagerly
embraced this Opportunity to enumerate
a long Catalogue of his own Virtues: 
But as no one Word he uttered
made any Impression on her Ladyship's
Faculty of Hearing, she could not possibly
shew her Contempt of this absurd
Manner of recommending himself, by
her common Practice of changing the
Subject, and forcing him to break the
Chain of his Discourse, like the Story
in Hudibras, 

—of the Bear and Fiddle,
Begun, but broke off in the Middle.
Lord and Lady Dellwyn had chosen
separate Apartments for some time; 
for whatever Passion remained in his
Lordship's Breast for his Lady, it bore
no Resemblance to any thing that is
called Love, even by the greatest Prostituters
of that much vilified, innocent
Word; and her Ladyship was always
ready to embrace gladly every Proposal, 

which had the least Tendency towards
the obtaining an additional Opportunity
of being absent from her
Lord; so that, during the whole
Night, she had such comfortable Reflections
as the foregoing Evening
could furnish, wholly to herself, and
was in no Danger of being robbed of
them by any human Being whatsoever. 
Persons who labour under the afflicting
and severe Misfortunes of their
own over-indulged Imaginations, are
very often induced to adopt the tragic
Lamentations of poetic Writers, sometimes
properly uttered by the Personages
they would represent, as struggling
under some great Calamity; and
sometimes the outrageous Rants, made
use of by our tragic Authors, seem calculated
to heighten the Passions, and,
when they are put into the Mouth of
the Poet's favourite Character, the Moral
of the Play seems to be nothing
more than that the most frantic Resverie 

is the highest Virtue. In the
Orphan, 

Confusion and Disorder seize the World,
To spoil all Trust and Converse amongst Men;
'Twixt Families engender endless Feuds,
In Countries needless Fears, in Cities Factions,
In States Rebellion, and in Churches Schism,
Till all Things move against the Course of Nature;
Till Form's dissolv'd, the Chain of Causes broken,
And the Originals of Being lost;
is a Speech that throws forth a noble
Exemplar of valiant Heroism, from the
Character the Author seems to endeavour
to shew forth, as possessed of all
that's amiable, in Opposition, and as a
Contrast, to the abandonedly profligate
Polydore. 
Calista, in the midst of her Penitence,
is for digging down deeply in 

the Earth, to find a Grave to hide her
from her Shame. To enumerate the
various Instances which might be easily
collected in the Tragedies that have
appeared since the Restoration of these
wild Rants, would be as endless, as to
point out all the Indecencies of the Comedies. 
Shakespeare, it must be confessed, had
his Rants too. Hotspur was ready to
bay the Moon; and, instead of being
wonderful, it was perfectly natural and
becoming in him; but Cordelia expressed
her Grief by falling Tears; and
Harry the Fifth was calm in the midst
of the greatest Dangers. But to return
to Lady Dellwyn: Her Memory supplied
her with abundance of tragic
Expressions, by which means she in
some measure vented her Passions,
otherwise she might have been in Danger
of either being choked, or of bursting
with inward Vexation. Instead of
gaining any Repose, for a Refreshment
to her fatigued and wearied Spirits, she 

was raving about her Apartment, performing
the Part of a tragic Queen,
and heroically lamenting her own hard
Fortune, as blank Verse or Rhyme occurred
to her Remembrance, being
perfectly convinced that her Fate was
very peculiarly unhappy. 
Thus was Lady Dellwyn actually miserable; 
and if she had been obliged
truly to declare the Cause of all this
mighty Tempest in her Bosom, she
could not have discovered any other,
than that Lord Clermont had led Lady
Fanny Chlegen to her Chair; and, however
inadequate to raise such a mental
Tumult as this may seem, yet many
State Revolutions have at first arisen
from Causes as minute, and as apparently
trifling. This Misfortune too
seemed to be without any Remedy. 
To call back Yesterday was impossible; 
and to forget this shocking Circumstance
was equally impracticable; yet
sometimes a small Gleam of Hope almost
imperceptibly stole upon her 

Thoughts, and flattered her that her
Day of Triumph might possibly be
written in the Book of Fate, and Lady
Fanny might in her Turn experience
the piercing Affliction of being neglected; 
but then the mortifying Picture
of Lady Fanny's triumphant Air,
and Lord Clermont's distant Formality,
was by her too-faithful Memory
presented to her View, and baffled
every peaceful Thought, or pleasing
Hope. 
These Tumults in Lady Dellwyn's
Bosom robbed her totally of all Power
of even assuming any of her usual Vivacity
in Conversation; and the spiritless
Languor, which had overspread
her Beauty, was too visible to the whole
Company to be concealed; and this
one Object so entirely engrossed her
Attention, that she forgot her usual
Diversion, the Pleasure of Coquetry
slipt out of her Remembrance, and
her Eyes were stedfastly fixed only on 

Lord Clermont's Motions and Behaviour. 
Lady Dellwyn formed many Schemes,
and revolved many Stratagems in her
Mind, in order to gain the Admiration
of Lord Clermont; every one of which
pleased her at first View (it being the
Privilege of new Fancies to present
themselves in a pleasing Manner), and
were then discarded, one after another,
as useless and impracticable. At last,
when she considered, that, at her own
Lord's Request, she had before shunned
Lord Clermont's offered Gallantry, she
imagined that possibly his Lordship's
present Behaviour might justly be imputed
to his Resentment on that Account. 
Then she first inwardly called
Lord Dellwyn very barbarous for such
his unreasonable Desire, and then resolved
to offend no more in that Manner; 
but, in order to prevent the disagreeable
Consequences of this Indiscretion's
(for such she now esteemed
it) spreading any farther, she sought 

every Opportunity to make such Advances
to Lord Clermont as she imagined
might be conducive to remove
his Anger, and heal the Breach between
them. 




The Naturalization of a foreign Custom,
or the Introduction of a Chichisbee. 
Lady Fanny soon found good
Reason to reflect on the swift
Vicissitude of all sublunary Honours; 
for, without any Failure of proper Coquetry
on her Part, the Scene was
suddenly reversed; she lost the Attention
and Gallantry of Lord Clermont,
which was now liberally bestowed on
Lady Dellwyn, to her inexpressible
Joy and Triumph. He was now become
as her Shadow, the constant Follower
of her Footsteps. Such a Flush
of Happiness soon put to Flight all her
Languor, and threw her into such a
violent Fit of Activity, that she seldom 

had Patience sufficient to remain long
in any one Situation, but was rapid in
her Motion from Place to Place. 
Children, when first they discover
their own Shadow, vary their Postures
as much as possible, in order to divert
themselves with their new Play-thing
and also to make others observe what
a pretty Image attends their Motions; 
and perhaps Lady Dellwyn's restless
and continual Movement might have
more Respect to the shewing of her
Shadow, than even herself. 
Altho' Lady Fanny had exerted her
utmost Endeavours to attach Lord
Clermont, yet the Disappointment had
not so visible an Effect on her. She
was either endued with a much larger
Share of Philosophy, or had acquired
a superior Degree of Art to conceal her
Mortification, than could be obtained
by her Rival. Almost unconcernedly
she could behold Lord Clermont's Assiduity
to please Lady Dellwyn, and 

smile with no other Emotion than a
Gesture of Scorn; a Commodity which,
instead of being wasted, encreases, by
the using, and of which Lady Fanny
was possessed of so large a Share, that
there was no Reason to apprehend its
being ever exhausted; whilst every Infant
might have read Lady Dellwyn's
Mortification in her Countenance, during
the Time that she laboured under
the fancied insupportable Affliction of
Lord Clermont's Neglect. 
Mr. Lucum, during the Time that
he imposed on himself the Belief that
he despised Ambition, whilst yet Lady
Fanny was very young, had placed
great Delight in his Daughter's Reading
to him; and as he then fled for
Refuge from worldly Disappointments
to Philosophy, she was furnished with
a great Variety of Ideas which led to an
utter Contempt of all Falsehood. Her
Manner of Life then never subjected
her to the Necessity of making an Appearance
which had no Foundation in 

Truth; which, with the Addition of
constantly suspecting all Persons with
whom we converse of equal Dissimulation,
seems to constitute the greatest
Part of that Kind of Wisdom, which,
with great Propriety, generally goeth
under the Denomination of Art or
Cunning, and requires some little
Study, and subsequent Practice, to
arrive at any considerable Perfection; 
altho' in this Acquisition, as well as
in all others, uncommon Geniuses
sometimes arise, who so immediately
arrive at the utmost Knowlege of this
Kind, that it might be almost conjectured
it came by Intuition. But Lady
Dellwyn was a very poor Proficient in
this Art; insomuch that her very
Looks would betray her most inward
Thoughts, when she endeavoured to
conceal them, by watching over her
Words before she gave them Utterance. 
Lord Clermont was no Dangler after
the Ladies: He never joined himself 

to any Woman's Train, either to gratify
her Vanity or his own, but had
always a farther View in every Application
he undertook to make to any
Lady; and his personal Attachment
to Lady Dellwyn was really unfeigned. 
He frequented public Places in order to
fix on proper Objects of his Gallantry; 
and never failed endeavouring to succeed
with Ladies he liked, who had
sacrificed willingly their Youth and
Beauty to the Gratification of Vanity
and Ambition; and very soon penetrated
whether or no there was any
Probability of succeeding in his Schemes. 
To those young Women, who, in marrying
for interested Considerations, had
Regard only to the obeying of Parents
and Guardians, Lord Clermont seldom
made any Addresses; apprehending
that they might be actuated by Principles
which could not possibly incline
them to satisfy his Inclinations. 
When Lady Dellwyn, in order to
enjoy the Luxury of some Degree of 

her own Approbation, had chearfully
complied with her Lord's Desire, and
avoided the Conversation of Lord Clermont,
he plainly perceived by her Behaviour
that all Attacks at that Time
would be vain, and have no Tendency
to answer his Purpose: He therefore
resolved to leave Bristol; but yet he constantly
corresponded with an intimate
Acquaintance, who gave him a minute
Account of all that passed there,
and more particularly related every
Transaction in which Lady Dellwyn
was concerned. 
The Situation in which Lady Dellwyn's
Vanity had placed her, by raising
a Contest between her and Lady Fanny
Chlegen for Admiration, was exactly
correspondent with Lord Clermont's Inclinations. 
He was perfectly acquainted
with the Workings of the Passions on
such Occasions, and well knew in what
Manner he could best turn them to his
own Advantage. 

The Account of this visible Rivalship
between these two Ladies brought
Lord Clermont with a swift Progress
back to the Hot Wells, where he resolved,
instead of taking any particular
Notice of Lady Dellwyn, to pay his
first Address to Lady Fanny, which
caused the apparent Preference given
to her the first Evening after his Arrival; 
for Experience had informed
him, that to pique a Lady's Vanity
through one particular Rival, whom
she most earnestly desires to surpass, is
no small Step towards obtaining a great
Degree of Power over her Mind. Lady
Dellwyn was entangled in the Snare,
and made Advances to Lord Clermont
without the least Consideration of any
Consequences, but the Hope of obtaining
what her unbridled Imagination
commanded her to believe was
absolutely necessary to her Happiness,
namely, a visible Triumph over Lady
Fanny Chlegen in Lord Clermont's Admiration. 
When Vanity becomes thus
predominant, it brings us into Subjection, 

and makes us the most abject
Slaves to every human Being with
whom we converse, who have any Inclination
to play the Tyrant. 
A Contention was now raised between
Lord Clermont and Lady Dellwyn; 
in which, if she was steadily resolved
to continue the Combat, she
might have been almost certain of being
baffled, if all Reflexion had not
been totally banished by the Perturbation
of her Thoughts; and Lord Clermont
by degrees gained such an Ascendency
over her Passions, by the impending
Danger of his publicly preferring
Lady Fanny, that she dared
not disoblige him. The Terror of
more tragic Nights was formidable to
her Imagination, and to be avoided at
any Expence whatever. 
Every Conversation that now passed
between Lord Clermont and Lady Dellwyn,
when they were remote enough
from Company to have no Hearers but 

each other, bore a much greater Resemblance
to the Roughness of Contention,
than to the Softness of Love. 
Within the small Space of a Quarter
of an Hour, she often made a Resolution
never to see him again; and,
when he seemed ready to believe her
Assertions, and to take a formal Leave
of her, the Apprehension of Lady
Fanny gave such a sudden Reflux to all
her Passions, that she forced a Smile,
and condescended to call him back
again, and revoke all she had declared
before. If, like Venus in Virgil's
Æneid, she had been possessed of the
Power to conceal Lady Fanny in a
Cloud from human Sight, she might
have retained some Command over herself,
and all Lord Clermont's Stratagems
would have been rendered of no
Effect. But the terrible Apprehension
of Lady Fanny's Triumph, and the
Insult she expected as the natural Consequence,
was too heavy a Burden for
a poor Lady in her Situation to support
with human Patience. 

There is no kind of feminine Character
so absolutely destructive of the
Contentment and Happiness of others,
as that of a Lady who is ever ready
prepared with all the necessary Arts
and Allurements of Coquetry, to receive
every disappointed Lover. It
gives the Man, who knows where to
be thus cordially welcomed (if his
Mistress should happen to be possessed
of any Share of Vanity, and he himself
is in Esteem in the gallant World),
an Opportunity to his Wish of alarming
her Pride, and raising her Desire to
allure him back again: Which one
Circumstance ruins and destroys more
Women, than if there were a hundred
blind Cupids of poetical Creation, and
every Cupid was armed with thousands
of pointed Darts and Arrows. 
Lady Fanny, from amongst her
Train of Admirers, peculiarly distinguished
a young Gentleman of the
Army, whose Name was Farquhar, to
whom she gave the Appellation of her 

Chichisbee. He was genteel, and remarkably
handsome; but was so far
from being puffed up with Vanity on
that Account, that he delighted mostly
in manly Exercises, and neither avoided
the burning Heat of the Sun, nor the
rough Bleakness of Winter Winds, to
preserve the Clearness of his Complexion. 
By virtue of the Office of
Chichisbee, it was his Duty to be a
constant Attendant on the Lady's Person; 
but this Italian Custom is not
sufficiently known and naturalized in
England, to be practised without occasioning
some Whispers, especially in
Places whence Persons who have not
wholly relinquished all the old vulgar
Notions of their Forefathers cannot be
totally excluded. 
Mr. Farquhar was possessed of an
uncommon Degree of Taciturnity in
public Assemblies; but his intimate
Acquaintance declared, that his Silence
was not justly to be imputed to
his Want of Ideas, but rather to his 

being furnished with too great a Number
to forget them readily, and become
an Adept in what is called Small
Talk. Nay, some Gentlemen, who
were most accustomed to his Conversation,
would not be persuaded that
Mr. Farquhar would submit to waste
his Time in such a trifling, dangling
Manner, without he had sufficient
Reason for the entertaining some
Hopes, which were not greatly to
Lady Fanny's Honour. But she baffled
all Whispers, Sneers, and Rumours,
by stretching up her Head the higher,
and treating them with absolute Contempt. 
When Mr. Farquhar was present,
she addressed him personally by
the familiar Appellations of Chichisbee,
Gallant, &c. and when absent, was peculiarly
eloquent in his Praise; by
which means it must be naturally concluded,
that there could be no Consciousness
in her Mind which might
justly reproach her with any Cause for
Shame on his Account. Her Ladyship
was in full Possession of that Mark 

of Innocence, of being as bold as a
Lion; and surely it must be very unreasonable
to be dissatisfied with such
a Conduct. 
When first Lady Dellwyn perceived
her Rival's Attention to Mr. Farquhar,
she began to lessen her Advances to
Lord Clermont; but was soon convinced
that Lady Fanny's Stock of Coquetry
was full sufficient for every Man who
was willing to accept it; nor was she
in any Degree less earnest to obtain the
Attention of Lord Clermont than she
had been before the Arrival of Mr.
Farquhar. 




A short Chapter, which makes a great
Revolution in Lady Dellwyn's Mind
and Behaviour. 
Lord Clermont, now he was
thoroughly engaged in a Pursuit,
employed his whole Thoughts in
various Contrivances, and left no Stratagem
unattempted by which he imagined
he could hope for any Prospect
of Success in his Scheme. Lady Dellwyn
had in her Youth read a great deal
concerning the Excellence of Virtue; insomuch,
that had Temptation attacked
her with the soft Allurements of Inclination,
she would have called up all
her Forces to struggle against its Power,
and overcome such a Passion; but, satisfied
that her Affections were perfectly 

free from any strong Bias in favour
of any particular Lover, she
walked securely in her own Opinion,
and never perceived the Necessity of
raising Fortifications to defend the unsuspected
and unthought-of Quarter. 
Lord Clermont's Experience, in his
Commerce with Women, gave him
many Advantages; nor did he cease
his Pursuit of Lady Dellwyn, till he
had, by her Apprehension of losing
his Admiration, prevailed upon her to
pay his own Price for her temporary
Triumph, playing his Part so artfully,
as to keep her Passions in a continual
Tumult, and gave her no Time for
Reflexion, till it was too late to preserve
her from his Snares. 
Lady Dellwyn was no Proficient in
the Art of imposing Falsehood on herself
by a Set of Names which seem
calculated for no other Purpose but to
lessen in the Mind the Abhorrence of
a vicious Conduct. She could not film 

over the Odium of her own Actions,
by applying to them the Words Gallantry,
Intriguing, Coquetting, with
many other softening Terms, many of
them of French Extraction, which have
been imported to England, and naturalized
into our Language, and which
have had an amazing Effect on our
Manners, perhaps to as great a Degree
as any foreign Luxuries whatever. 
As soon as the Turbulency of Lady
Dellwyn's Passions was a little subsided,
and gave her Leave and Leisure to reflect,
she considered herself as truly unhappy,
by perceiving, that, instead of
her, it was Lord Clermont who had
triumphed, and that she only exemplified
the Truth of the Observation in
some old Play, that 

When Women fall, not quite bereft of Grace,
Their very Servants read it in their Face.
Lady Dellwyn had indeed undertaken
an arduous Task; she had entered the 

Lists, and engaged in a Rivalship, with
Lady Fanny Chlegen, in a Scene of Life
which, required a much greater Degree
of skilful Management than she
was Mistress of. She had not sufficiently
acquired the Art of living continually
in a Masquerade, to be always
ready sagaciously to conceal her natural
Countenance; and her Thoughts were
too apt to break through all artificial
Disguises, which gave Lord Clermont
too great an Advantage over her Weakness; 
nor could she now adopt the
Shadow for the Substance, or assume
free lively Air, which is the Result
of conscious Innocence, when she had
wandered from that pleasing Path. 
Now that slow-paced, tardy Kind
of Wisdom, which, like faint-hearted
Soldiers, offers its Assistance when the
Combat is lost, and serves only to shew,
that, had it come sooner, the Battle
might have been gained; found its
Way by Reflexion into Lady Dellwyn's
Mind, and served sufficiently to 

enhance the comfortless State of her
Thoughts. Such are thy Triumphs,
thy Exploits, O Vanity! How various
are thy Whims! and how great thy
Tyranny! Shame and Confusion now
attended on Lady Dellwyn's being seen
with Lord Clermont, in full as great
Proportion as Glory and Triumph had
done but a very small Space of Time
before; and Lady Fanny, who was
perfectly Mistress of the Art of looking
stedfastly at another with a significant
Air, could now raise in Lady Dellwyn
conscious Blushes, which were more
mortifying than all she had suffered
formerly from her triumphant Manner. 
Lord Clermont was a great Follower
of Pleasure: He had not Love enough
for himself to restrain him from the Indulgence
of vicious Habits, and consequently
could not be expected to have
sufficient Affection for another, to curb
his Inclinations, in order to avoid any
evil Consequences that might attend 

his own Gratification; but yet he was
not otherwise ill-natured. He had no
Taste for the Sport of ridiculing a
bashful Person out of Countenance; 
he delighted not in giving Pain, either
for its own Sake, or to please his own
Vanity, by playing off those little Arts
by which a Man may shew to any
Company the Power he has over a
Lady's Passions. If this had been his
Pleasure, he might yet have given Lady
Fanny the Preference in Public, and
have caused a Tragedy, which would
indeed have called for an able Pen to
have reached but half its Height. 
Lady Dellwyn now hung her Head,
and drooped like a half-withered
Flower. The whole Dignity of her
Person was lost, and she would then
gladly have exchanged her present
Situation to have returned to her former
Retirement, and with Joy have
quitted all the Pomp of her State and
Quality, to have re-assumed the innocent
Amusements of Miss Lucum. 

It is now Time to take a little Survey
of Lord Dellwyn's Situation. His
Manner of passing over one Day after
another afforded very little Variety. 
That Fit of the Gout which having
been the Means of prolonging Lady
Dellwyn's Stay at Bristol, was then productive
of inexpressible Pleasure to her
Mind, had never totally left him, the
whole Space not exceeding a Month. 
Much Coquetry may be practised, and
many Changes and Revolutions may
happen, in the Gallant World, 

In the Space of one revolving Moon.
Pain and Peevishness filled up his
Lordship's Days, and his Nights
brought only constant Repetitions of
the same melancholy Scene. His
Lady, to avoid the Uneasiness Compassion
for his Sufferings might give
her, chose to be continually absent. His
Servants indeed were weary; but as he
was not ungenerous, they comforted
themselves with the Hopes of future 

Profits, and therefore submitted the
more chearfully to bear all that Sort of
Language which is the Result of Impatience,
and would be thought very
unpolite if used to any other than Inferiors. 




Wherein Miss Bilson appears, and by
her Behaviour proves the great Efficacy
of such an Example as her Mother's. 
One Circumstance proved unfortunate
for Lady Dellwyn, tho'
it appeared entirely foreign to any of
her Concerns. Miss Bilson's modest,
bashful Beauty had not raised even one
Spark of Envy in her Ladyship, since
it could not be brought in Competition
with her own, which was so raised by
that fashionable Charm Self-complacency,
that, amongst People one knows,
she was certain of receiving the Preference; 
besides that most powerful
Attraction, of being the gay Wife of
an old gouty Man. Hope is allowed 

to fan the Fire of Love: But it doth
more; for it often kindles a Passion
which assumes the Name; and the first
Motive of a Man's Address shall be the
Persuasion that it will be well received. 
Tho' Miss Bilson gave no Alarm to
Lady Dellwyn's Vanity, yet she proved
most destructive of her Peace; for, by
depriving Captain Drumond of his Influence
over Sir Harry Cleveland, she
left him at Liberty to fix his Attention
more strongly on his other Bubble,
Lord Dellwyn. Sir Harry's Taste was
not yet so vitiated as to render him
quite insensible to Beauty, adorned
with what but a few Months before
would have appeared to him its greatest
Ornament. His Reason would sometimes
contradict the fashionable Delusions
with which he endeavored to silence
it, but perhaps all Miss Bilson's
Attractions might not operate so strongly
on Sir Harry's Fancy, as the Insensibility 

with which she listened to what he
thought his brightest Conversations. 
Sir Harry's Pride was greatly piqued; 
for Miss Bilson's great Sensibility, as
well as quick Discernment, shone so
visibly in her Countenance, that he
was thereby wholly deprived of the
last!last Resource to which Vanity so often
flies, of accusing the undelighted
Hearer of Stupidity. He had therefore
nothing left him, but to force her
Approbation; and, to effect it, grew
still more extravagant in the Exercise
of his newly-acquired Talents of Conversation; 
for he could not doubt but
he was in the Road to please, and
therefore had nothing to do but to
pursue it with greater Assiduity. 
Some Spirit was requisite to pursue
this Plan thro' the Discouragements Sir
Harry met with; for the more he endeavoured
to shine, the less he pleased
Miss Bilson. When he expected she
should admire, she only pitied; when 

he intended to excite at once her Mirth
and her Applause, she grieved to see a
Man, whose original Character she had
heard so differently represented by one
who knew him before he came to Bristol,
so corrupted by the Stream of fashionable
Folly, that he seemed to have
buried the Understanding of a Man
under the frippery Affectations of a
Monkey. 
In short, all Sir Harry's Attempts to
charm produced a quite contrary Effect
from what he intended; and there
was but one Thing in his whole Behaviour
which pleased her, and that was
his ardent Desire to do so; so that she
was not quite insensible, any more than
to the uncommon Agreeableness of his
Person, and the Rays of good Sense
which would sometimes make their
own Way, and shine forth in spite of
himself. But all this could not overbalance
the Disgust she conceived at
his Turn of Conversation; nay, when
she considered how much both Nature 

and Education had done for him, she
was the more displeased on reflecting
how much he had laboured to do
against himself. 
One day that Sir Harry saw a Lady
sitting by Miss Bilson, whose Awkwardness
appeared to him a favourable
Subject for his Wit, he determined
by the dazling Display of it entirely to
captive Miss Bilson; and accordingly
soon took Occasion to change his Address
from her to the Lady, to whom he
intended the Honour of being unknowingly
so useful to him, and who therefore
could not put him to the Trouble
of acknowleging an Obligation on
that Account. 
This Lady was brought from almost
an entire Solitude to Bristol for
her Health. Her Person was awkward,
and her Mind ignorant. Mrs. Bilson
had observed at her first Appearance
her Surprize at the great Number of
People she saw there collected together, 

and how much at a Loss she
seemed on the slightest Occasions. Mrs.
Bilson knew it must be painful, and
therefore pitied her, but the Savage
became immediately the Object of
general Ridicule. The Sons and
Daughters of Mirth led their Acquaintance
up to gaze at this Novelty. They
would sometimes be civil, in order to
enjoy the Distress she was in how to
make a Return for what she thought
so prodigious an Obligation, and then,
by a loud Laugh, delivered her out of
that Difficulty, but left her no less embarrassed
what to judge of so odd a
Behaviour. Others would insult her
with the utmost Ill-breeding, in order
to amuse themselves with the Confusion
into which their Insolence had
thrown her. But lest this Fact should
appear incredible in some Readers, it is
necessary to declare, that this Insolence
was never expressed in vulgar or Billingsgate
Language. The poor Woman
was so distressed at this kind of
Treatment, that she never ventured 

abroad but at the Hours requisite for
her Health; therefore she was seldom
seen but at the Well Room; and even
there she contrived to get into a Corner
before the rest of the Company came
having more than once experienced
what it was to be attacked with a
broad Stare, and a Laugh of Derision,
as with bashful Fear and Trembling she
had opened the Door. 
Mrs. Bilson had observed all that
past; and feeling great Compassion
for a Woman who appeared to be the
Object of Ridicule, only because Fortune
had fixed her in a State of Solitude,
made some Enquiries after her at
the Place where she lodged; and, hearing
nothing but what was of Advantage
to her Character, resolved to take
her under Protection, hoping by her
Influence to preserve her from Insult; 
for Mrs. Bilson had an uncommon
Flow of Wit, ever ready to defend
Innocence from the cruel Attacks of
Derision; tho' she had an Understanding 

greatly above making use of it to
make others smart by a Jest, unless
upon such Occasions. 
But Sir Harry Cleveland's Motive for
desiring to shine, was too urgent to
suffer him to respect Miss Bilson's Presence
as he ought; and he thought himself
peculiarly happy on this Occasion,
that her Mother was not at that Time
in the Company. 
Sir Harry began by humbugging the
poor Lady, and told her all the marvellous
Things he could invent; while
she stared with the utmost Astonishment,
to his entire Satisfaction; being
of a great Poet's Opinion, that 

Wonder is involuntary Praise.
But Miss Bilson, not seeing it in the same
Light, at last interrupted his Conversation. 
“Among all the strange Things Sir
Harry hath told you, Madam, (and 

she) he hath omitted the most marvellous
of all; which is, that there
are Men, nay, even Gentlemen, and
who call themselves Men of Honour
too, who take Pride in publishing
the greatest Falsehoods of
their own inventing, to Persons
whose Regard for Truth renders
them unsuspicious of the Deceit; 
and imagine they have obtained a
great Triumph, when they have imposed
on those whose Credulity hath
no other Foundation, but a Belief
that they are above such low Attempts. 
This indeed, if called a
Lye, they would detest; but sanctify
it under the Name of Humbugg: 
Tho' in reality they are synonymous
Terms; only he who tells malicious
or interested Lies, humbuggs for the
Gratification of Malice, or for Advantage; 
while he whose Motive is
Mirth, lyes for a smaller Temptation; 
and while we blame him who
thus endeavours to raise an Estate,
ought we not to despise him who is 

guilty of the same Breach of Truth
merely to excite a Laugh, and that
only from the most trifling Part of
the Creation, whose Approbation
can no more give Honour, than their
Disapprobation can with any Colour
of Justice fix Dishonour? 

“The broadest Mirth unfeeling Folly wears,
“is no solid Pleasure to the Person
who obtains it, nor can it give any
Glory to him who ocasions it.” 
The untaught Lady was indeed all
Wonder and Amazement. A Person
must have lived 

Where never human Foot the Ground hath pressed,
but in a 

—Desart inaccessible,
Under the Shade of melancholy Boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping Hours of Time,
who can suppose that Mankind will never
seek their Advantage at the Expence
of the Truth; but that they
should wantonly, almost without 

Temptation, declare War with it, this
Lady's Ignorance of the World (in
that respect an Advantage to her)
would not suffer her to believe. However,
Sir Harry would not leave her
the Power of expressing her Incredulity
in this Point, from the various
Exclamations with which he signified
his Surprize that Miss Bilson should be
insensible to so polite an Amusement,
wherein he was certain she must allow
much Wit was requisite to shine, and
make any considerable Figure. “Not
near so much, Sir (replied she), as
in the writing of Mother Goose's
Tales, or the Exploits of Jack the
Giant-killer. He who first thought
of his Four-mile Boots had some Invention; 
an Honour the most fortunate
Humbugger cannot boast; for
all the Falsehoods he spreads are so
only in respect to Time. They are
what have happened, or might naturally
happen, and therefore the
only Merit he can claim, is that of
having a sufficient Capacity to turn 

Truth into Falsehood; and whilst
the Writers of such Histories as Jack
the Giant-killer only humbly desire
to amuse the Imaginations of Children,
the ambitious Humbugger
grasps, as his ultimate End, to deceive
the Judgments of Men.” 
Sir Harry had suffered his Mind to
be so darkened by vain Affectation,
that he had lost all the Perspicuity of
his Discernment, and was now in as
great a Perplexity as he had caused in
the untaught Lady herself. He was
bewildered by 

An Ignis fatuus, that bewitches
And leads Men into Pools and Ditches.
He had great Deference for Miss Bilson's
Opinion; but had now so long accustomed
himself to consider this trifling
Manner of damping his Intellects,
and wasting his Time, to be the highest
Honour to which the human Species
could arrive, that he could not easily 

persuade himself a Person of Miss Bilson's
Understanding could possibly have
a Contempt for it; and for some time
harboured a Suspicion, that she herself
was playing the very same Game which
she endeavoured to make him believe
she so heartily despised. But when he
was convinced that she was in earnest,
he could not immediately give up the
Talent which he now most valued; but
entered into a serious Defence of his
Practice; which gave Rise to a Dispute
of some Length between them, till, inwardly
vexed by the Force of her Arguments,
and yet ashamed to acknowlege
that he could not reply to them,
he left the Room in visible Confusion. 
And Miss Bilson hoped that his Countenance
indicated Marks of Indignation; 
for when the Lustre of Truth
makes a Man angry, it is a much better
Symptom, than when it hath no other
Effect than to raise in him Sneers of
Derision. 




The great Power of Beauty, when accompanied
by Modesty and Reason, not
only to warm, but also to amend, the
human Heart. 
Sir Harry Cleveland immediately
fled into public Company, in order
to seek a Remedy for the Ill humour
Miss Bilson's Insensibility to all his
Wit and Ridicule had thrown him into
with the Person in the World he was
most unwilling to quarrel with, even
himself. He at first determined to
quit any farther Attempts on a Heart,
which he began to suspect would cost
him the unsupportable Labour of once
more new-forming himself, before he
could entertain any Hopes of succeeding; 
and if Miss Bilson had at that 

Time by any sudden Misfortune been
deprived of her Beauty, he would certainly
have prevailed on himself to
discover that her Understanding also
was very moderate, and that she only
affected to despise what she had not
Wit enough to attain; for he who
had so well succeeded in hiding away
his own Understanding, even from
himself, could easily have done that
Favour by another. But her Person
had made so deep an Impression on his
Fancy, that, if he had endeavoured it,
he could not for his Heart have raised
a barbarous Inclination to conceal from
his own Eyes her apparent good Sense. 
Lady Dellwyn and Lady Fanny
Chlegen were both ready to welcome
him into their Party, and strove with
Emulation which should entertain him
most. 
Lord Clermont was not at the Rooms
that Evening, to Lady Dellwyn's great
Joy; for his Presence in public was now 

become as much her Mortification as
even it had been her Triumph, and
served only to confuse, and put her
out of Countenance; so that she endeavoured,
by the Amusement of a
little Coquetry with Sir Harry Cleveland,
to silence her own Reflexions, at
least for a short Season. But all their
Conversation consisted in an Affectation
of Mirth, which was very foreign to
their Hearts, and consequently soon
grew tiresome. 
Lady Fanny was indeed all alive
and merry; but it had a very different
Effect from what was customary on
Sir Harry. He saw the Emptiness of
his own acquired Manner of Conversation
by the frothy Levity of her
Jests; and the more she endeavoured
to shine in his Eyes, the more his
Judgment was inclined to give Miss
Bilson the Approbation she deserved. 
He retired to his Apartment in the
disagreeable Situation of being perfectly 

unsatisfied with himself, his Love
and Judgment both combined to urge
him to cast off the Practice of all that
Knowlege of the World, and its Manners,
which he had taken such Pains
to acquire, and to bring himself back
again into a State wherein his Understanding
might have free Liberty to
exert itself, and be no longer obliged
to be carefully concealed, for fear it
should bring a Scandal and Shame on
its Owner. But then, on the other
hand, to confess that he had been deluded
by such glaring Fallacies, to condemn
himself of such an Absurdity as
to have thus been a Dupe to his own
Vanity, whilst he was aiming at the
high Applause of having duped others,
seemed to his Imagination an Herculean
Labour, and he was greatly perplexed
to resolve in what Manner he
could undertake to begin so mortifying
a Task. It had been much easier
for him to slide from a rational Employment
into his present Manner of
Life, because it came by degrees, and 

one Folly naturally succeeds another; 
but at once to turn from them all, and
enter into the one Path, which leads to
a reasonable Life, seemed a heavy, if
not an absolutely insupportable Burden. 
Sir Harry was some time before he
would permit himself again to appear
before Miss Bilson; but her Idea had
made so lively and strong an Impression
on his Fancy, that it was impossible
for him to exclude it from his
Thoughts. His Reluctance to continue
in a wilful Banishment from the
Object which contributed so greatly
to his Delight, at last conquered his
Reluctance to throw off his adopted
Follies; and the first Opportunity he
perceived of entertaining her apart from
other Company, he contrived purposely
to introduce the Subject of their
last Argument concerning Humbugging; 
on which Miss Bilson displaying
her usual good Sense, he no
sooner finished one Sentence, than he
cried out, 


From Lips like those, what Precepts fail to move?
“I can no longer oppose Reasoning
so just. 

“Truth divine comes mended from your Tongue;
“and I blush at the Errors into which
I have been led. Conduct me, my
fair Guide, out of this Labyrinth
of dangerous Folly, back into the
Land of Truth; strengthen the
Weakness of my Mind by your frequent
Converse; and, after having
convinced my Reason, correct my
Manners.” 
Miss Bilson, somewhat piqued, replied,
“Tho' you cannot persuade me
that my Cause is not good, you give
me a sufficient Proof how bad an
Advocate I am, since all I have said
cannot prevent your endeavouring
to make me the Dupe of the very 

Talent, as you are pleased to call it,
which I am endeavouring to explode;” 
for, she really imagined Sir
Harry was humbugging of her; for
Truth and Falsehood are so very incompatible
in their very Nature, that,
from the same Source whence the latter
generally flows, we cannot easily believe
the former ever proceeds. But
he was for once truly serious, and at
last convinced her he was so; tho' several
Meetings were necessary to prevail
on her to give Credit to what appeared
to her so great an Improbability. 
Sir Harry now began to cultivate an
Acquaintance with Mr. and Mrs. Bilson; 
and found, that had he fortunately
fallen into their Company when
he first came to Bristol, he should not
have been under a Necessity of running
into so much Folly, to procure his
Mind an agreeable Dissipation. 

His Attachment began to wear a serious
Air, and Lady Fanny Chlegen,
who had excused his Insensibility towards
her only upon a Supposition that
it was general; and that he had no Idea
of Sentiment, was piqued to see another,
and that too, in her own Language,
an unexperienced Chit, effect
what she had in vain tried at, as soon
as she came to Bristol. 
Lady Fanny therefore, in revenge,
planted all her Raillery at Sir Harry; 
yet the Fire was not so strong, but a
Man less captivated than he was might
have borne it undisturbed. She asked
him if he meant to rival Harvey, and
make some new Discovery concerning
the Circulation of the Blood, by continually
gazing in Miss Bilson's Face,
where it played up and down with all
the aukward Rusticity of Blushing? 
She bid him consider what Figure those
untaught Eyes, those uneducated Smiles,
and that odious Bashfulness, would make
amongst People of Fashion, when he 

should introduce her into the World. 
In short, as Lady Dellwyn was now so
oppressed in her Mind, that she was
much more unfit than ever to pretend
to a Rivalship with Lady Fanny in the
large Field of Gaiety and Gallantry,
her Ladyship seemed to set her whole
Force against the Charms of Miss Bilson; 
altho' she was too reserved, and
appeared too little in Public, to put in
a Claim for general Admiration. But
one Man of Sir Harry Cleveland's Figure
was enough to raise Lady Fanny's
Indignation, and to make her shoot
forth at her all the Darts of her Ridicule. 

So a wild Tartar, when he spies
A Man that's handsome, valiant, wise,
If he can kill him, thinks t' inherit
His Wit, his Beauty, and his Spirit;
As if just so much he enjoy'd,
As in another is destroy'd.
Sir Harry was so tender of Miss
Bilson, that altho' he despised Lady 

Fanny, he could scarcely bear to hear
her speak so disrespectfully of one whom
he knew not how to think on but with
Adoration; and told her Ladyship,
that, “could he obtain Miss Bilson, he
should not only be the happiest, but
the proudest, of Mankind, as possessing
a Treasure that no other Man
could boast: That as for the Company,
which she meant by the World,
he should be in no Hurry to introduce
her to them; for she was as
unfit for a Life of Folly, as Folly
was for a virtuous and reasonable
Woman: For I am sure (added he)
it may be said of your Sex, 

“When Vice prevails, and Fashions bold bear Sway,
“The Post of Honour is a private Station.
Lady Fanny did not suffer what she
thought so great an Affront to pass unnoticed; 
but, mistaking Raillery for
Railing, she lost some of the Dignity 

which she generally endeavoured to
preserve, and thereby encouraged Sir
Harry to fail so much in his Respect
for her, that he left her without attempting
to reply. 
After this Conversation, Lady Fanny
had very little Intercourse with Sir
Harry Cleveland; but aimed her Insolence
at Miss Bilson, whom she continually
stared out of Countenance; and
whenever Sir Harry was speaking to
her, would, by directing the Eyes of
every one near her, by Gestures and
Laughing, raise such Blushes in that
young Lady, that Sir Harry was obliged,
in Compassion to her, to address
her as little in Public as possible; which
he was enabled to persuade himself to
do, by having obtained Permission to
visit Mr. and Mrs. Bilson at home. 
Mr. Chlegen likewise gave no small
Offence to his Lady, for having made
Acquaintance with Mr. Bilson, from
which he received great Pleasure. He 

soon extended it to the rest of the Family; 
and whenever they were in
the same Place, contrived to be near
them; glad, by being engaged in Conversation,
to seem inattentive to his
Wife's imprudent Conduct. 
When Sir Harry slackened in his
public Addresses to Miss Bilson, he
made himself what Reparation he
could in the Conversation of her Parents,
or the younger Branches of her
Family. This naturally threw Mr.
Chlegen more into Discourse with Miss
Bilson, who was the most at Leisure,
and whose good Sense could not fail to
please a Man of his Turn of Mind. 
Lady Fanny's Resentment at Mr.
Chlegen's Intimacy with the People to
whom she had the strong Antipathy
of Good to Bad, operated so violently,
that she endeavoured to raise a Report
of his being enamoured of Miss Bilson,
knowing the Ease and Freedom
with which she conversed with him 

would bear the Appearance of Encouragement. 
But her amiable and modest
Conduct, as well as the very high
Reputation of her Parents, blunted the
Sting of Slander; and her Ladyship
could not succeed in a Point wherein
she was unwittingly endeavouring to
mortify her own Vanity, by making
People believe that she was neglected,
for one whose unfashionable Bashfulness
rendered her so despicable to her
Ladyship. However, such was her
unwearied Malice, that Sir Harry
found it necessary to put a stop to her
Attempts, by some Intimations concerning
her own Conduct; which his
Politeness would not have suffered him
to utter, if any thing of less Consequence
than Miss Bilson's Character
had been concerned. 
Sir Harry was by degrees brought
to a very strong Sense of the Folly in
which he had been immersed, and by
his Friends convincing him, that 


All Praise is foreign, but of true Desert;
Plays round the Head, but comes not near the Heart.
Capt. Drumond's Merit, like a Bubble
in the Water, began to sink to nothing; 
and Sir Harry became acquainted
with his true Character by
Mrs. Bilson, whose Penetration was
too acute to be imposed on by any of
those numerous Virtues he pretended to
assume; tho' she saw very little of him; 
for he perceived in her something from
which he naturally absented himself,
and feared Detection; for where-ever
he found Praise was deserved, and
consequently not courted, he knew
there was no Employment for a Flatterer. 
Sir Harry had gained the good Opinion
of the Family he most esteemed; 
but it was much increased by a little
Incident, which shewed he was not
insensible to the Distress of Persons
who had no particular Title to his 

Regard, farther than as his Heart was
to be affected by general Compassion. 
But this Incident shall be reserved for
the' next Chapter. 




A Scene of great Distress reversed, and
the Sufferers relieved by Mrs. Bilson. 
One Morning, when Sir Harry
Cleveland accosted Mrs. Bilson,
she thought she perceived an Air of
Melancholy on his Countenance; and
asked him if she was mistaken? He
acknowleged there might be some
Grounds for her Observation; for that
he had been greatly shocked that Morning,
by the Distress of a Family who
lodged in the same House with him. 
The Master of it, who was a Clergyman,
was just dead; and his Widow
and Two Daughters in such Excess of
Grief, that he could not be ignorant 

of if, for their Lamentations reached
his Apartment. 
Mrs. Bilson was shocked with the
pathetic Description of Distress Sir
Harry gave her. Her Compassion was
always ready to be bestowed on the
Unhappy; but in this Case her Pity
was enlarged, by the additional Sensibility
of a Person who was but just delivered
from Fears of the same Calamity; 
and imagined it probable that
this poor Woman might have still an
additional Affliction, as Part, at least,
of the Support of their Family must be
lost with her Husband. 
As soon as Mrs. Bilson could conveniently
withdraw from her Company,
she went, with her eldest Daughter
only, directly to the House where Sir
Harry lodged; and having asked for
the Mistress of it, inquired of her the
apparent Circumstances of her distressed
Lodgers. 

The Woman told the Ladies she
imagined their Fortunes must be very
narrow; for, as soon as they came,
they requested her to procure some
Plain-work for them; and that they
had dispatched a great Quantity since
they had been there, having worked
as hard as possible, and lived with the
utmost Frugality in every thing but
where the poor sick Man was concerned,
for whom they had been most
careful to provide every Comfort and
Convenience that a much more ample
Fortune could have procured him. 
This Account of the poor Widow
demanded Mrs. Bilson's good Opinion,
as much as her Distress had raised her
Compassion; for she always gladly
embraced every Opportunity of thinking
well of another; her Fund of Charity
in that Branch being as extensive
as in that of distributing to the Poor; 
and she grieved to think that a Clergyman
and his Family should be reduced
to such Necessity. When the 

Mistress of the House, perceiving by her
Countenance how much she was affected
by what she had related, thus
proceeded: 
“Indeed, Madam, I have Reason
to think the little Fund they brought
with them, notwithstanding the
Pains they have taken to add to it
by their uncommon Industry, is almost,
if not quite, exhausted. But
Sir Harry Cleveland has been so generous,
as to desire me to contrive
to defray the Expences of the Funeral
in a decent Manner, and to
undertake the Ordering of it, which
he had promised to discharge, as
well as what shall be due for Lodgings; 
and also he will furnish them
with whatever Sum shall be requisite
for their Journey back. But as
he thought it might not be proper
for him to wait on them in their
present melancholy Situation, he has
requested me to transact the whole
Affair; the Management of which 

I find to be so difficult a Task, that
I have not yet obeyed his Commands.” 
Miss Bilson's Eyes, at the Relation
of Misery she at first heard, had
flowed with tender Tears; but by a
sudden Transition they now sparkled
with Joy, at the Account of Sir Harry
Cleveland's Generosity; one Proof of
Virtue in her Lover giving her more
Pleasure than all the Flattery he could
have bestowed on her. But this Effect
did not pass unobserved by her Mother,
who was watchful to discover how far
Sir Harry's Assiduities had made an Impression
on her, without putting her
to the Confusion of confessing. 
As the Woman of the House found
Mrs. Bilson was inclined to visit her
Lodgers, she told her, she wished that
she would be so kind to undertake the
acquainting them with Sir Harry Cleveland's
generous Offer to them, as it 

would come better from her than from
an Inferior. 
In this Mrs. Bilson willingly acquiesced,
and was introduced to them. 
After offering every Assistance in her
Power for their Convenience in a Place
where they were entire Strangers, she
acquainted them, with all the Tenderness
she was Mistress of, of the
generous Intentions of Sir Harry Cleveland. 
Mrs. Bilson did not consider Poverty
as having a Power to make human
Creatures relinquish their Feeling: 
But, as is truly the Case, she thought
Poverty added to the Apprehension and
Sensibility of Insult; and therefore was
more peculiarly careful of the Manner
in which she treated the Distressed,
whom she endeavoured to assist, than
she thought necessary in her Intercourse
with her Equals, or even her Superiors; 
and would often reflect, that if her
own former Misfortunes had led her
Mind into this Consideration for others, 

she had great Reason to be thankful for
having been in a State of Humiliation. 
The poor Widow felt her Goodness
deeply in her Heart, and therefore had
no Flow of Words ready to burst forth
in Elocution to express her Thanks; 
but turned her Eyes, with a quick
Transition, alternately on Mrs. Bilson
and her Daughters, full of the highest
Amazement. Mrs. Bilson endeavoured
as well to sooth her Sorrows, as to assure
her of Deliverance from future
Oppressions in point of Fortune; and
offered her all the Services she could
render her towards establishing her
Family in the World. At which
Words, tender Feeling for her own,
and the Offspring of the Man she had
loved with an ardent Affection, brought
a Flood of Tears to her Relief. She
wept, cast up her Eyes to Heaven,
could just utter the Words, Good God!
and then sunk back in her Chair, as
being overwhelmed with the grateful
Emotions of her own Mind. 

When she was recovered, and the
Abatement of her Fears for her Children,
by Mrs. Bilson's Assurances, had
given her a little more Strength to
support Conversation, Mrs. Bilson
found, by discoursing with her, that
her eldest Daughter was to have been
married to a young Clergyman of excellent
Character, whom her Husband
intended to make his Curate, upon his
coming into Possession of a Living
which was promised him at the Death
of the Incumbent, who was dying of
a Dropsy, but had out-lived his intended
Successor. 
This Match the poor Woman grieved
to think was at an End, as she feared
her Daughter would not be able to
support at once her Father's Death, and
the Loss of a Man on whom she had
placed the strongest Affection, but
could not now marry, as they had no
Prospect, at least no near one, of a
Subsistence. 

Mrs. Bilson desired she would not
suffer this Thought to add to hers or
her Daughter's Affliction; for she would
engage to secure them as good a Provision
as the Curacy she mentioned; 
and desired she would inform her
Daughter, who was left in the Country
to take care of the Remainder of their
Family, of this Consolation, that she
might not sink under the Weight of
her real and apprehended Misfortunes. 
A considerable Part of every Day
Mrs. Bilson spent with this distressed
Family; and had the Satisfaction of
seeing them resigned to the Dispensation
of divine Providence, tho' grieved
for the Loss of one who was justly infinitely
dear to them; but the unexpected
Generosity, of which they stood
in great need, left them only one Subject
for their Affliction. 
Before they left the Place, Mrs.
Bilson explained more particularly to 

them her Intentions for the young
Clergyman. Her many charitable Institutions,
as she chose they should be
very constantly and carefully attended,
she thought too hard a Duty for one
Man, and therefore determined to join
this young Man in the same Office; 
about whom she had written Letters of
Inquiry to all Persons capable of giving
any Account of him, and had received
very satisfactory Answers concerning
his whole past Behaviour. 
The Salary Mrs. Bilson allowed was
above that of a common Curacy; and
she promised, on her Return home, to
fit up a House, not only for the Reception
of the young Couple, but for
the Widow and her younger Children
likewise; and, to render their Situation
as comfortable as possible, by
stocking a little Land with what might
be useful for their Family. The Clergyman's
second Daughter was something
older than Miss Bilson, who took
a particular Fancy to her; and, as her 

own Maid was going to be married,
had a great Inclination to take her; and
Mrs. Bilson gave the Mother her Choice,
whether she should be put into Business,
or gratify Miss Bilson's Desire. 
The Mother immediately replied, that
she had rather her Daughter should be
placed in her Family, and receive the
Advantage of her Instruction and Example,
than be put into any other Employment; 
and Mr. Bilson's Daughter
received another with the utmost Marks
of Kindness; her Mother not having
been able to find any Person she thoroughly
liked to be about this newfound
Darling of her Heart. 
Sir Harry Cleveland performed what
he had undertaken; and Mr. and Mrs.
Bilson made the Widow so considerable
a Present as would enable her to settle
her Affairs quite to her Satisfaction; 
and Miss Bilson and her Sister-in-law
insisted on the good Woman's suffering
them to equip her Daughter, if the
Marriage took Effect. 

Thus was this distressful Scene reversed,
and the Widow and Fatherless
cheered by the good Offices of compassionate
Humanity. The poor Widow
left the Place with a most grateful
Heart for all the Favours which
had been showered down upon her,
and felt all the Consolation her Grief
for the Loss of an excellent Husband
could admit of, from a true Sense of
the great Blessing of having Three of
her Children well-provided for. Her
Pride felt no Wound from thinking
Two were in a State of nominal Servitude; 
for in reality they were used
with all the Kindness of Friends; insomuch
that many Persons, who have
experienced what it is to be dependent
under the Denomination of Friends,
would rejoice in every Corner of their
Hearts to meet with half the same Indulgence. 
And their Mother, who had
flattered herself with no high Expectations
for them, poured out her Thanks
to the Almighty for their being so
placed, that they were rather with 

Protectors of their Youth, and Exemplars
for their Conduct, than with Mistresses,
where their Dependence was
the strongest Security for the kind
Treatment they should receive; for
Mrs. Bilson's Children had learned of
her to admit no one into any Connexion
with themselves, but with an
Intention to render them happy. 
Mrs. Bilson's frequent Visits to this
afflicted Family became known, and
consequently ridiculed, by many of
those who esteemed themselves the superior
Part of the Company. Lady
Fanny Chlegen “greatly wondered, how
it was possible for a Woman of any
Fashion to go raking into Holes and
Corners after every crying Woman,
and more especially a Country Parson's
Wife, who surely was below
one's Notice. But the Pride of some
People took a strange Turn, and laboured
hard to get the Character of
Good-nature; whereas, if they had
any Sensibility, or the least Delicacy 

of Nerves, they could not be thrusting
themselves into Scenes of Distress.” 
Thus would her Ladyship run on
till she was almost out of Breath; and,
when she had a little rested herself, she
would begin again, declaring, “that
she wished with all her Heart she
had as little Feeling as those People: 
It had been the greatest Misfortune
of her Life to be born with such
tender Nerves; that, for her Part,
she could not recover herself again
the whole Day, after having been
accidentally present at any melancholy
Spectacle.” 
Lady Dellwyn did not think what
Mrs. Bilson did was so strange, as unnecessary; 
for she delivered it very
gravely as her Opinion, that the Distress
was not so very great as represented; 
“for,” said she, “the Woman
has only lost her Husband: Or suppose
she suffered a little in Fortune, why 

surely Liberty might recompense
her for that, as she would remain
sole Mistress of what remained, and
be subject to no perverse Controul,
unreasonable Humours, or authoritative
Refusals of her Inclinations.” 
Both the Ladies heartily forgave Sir
Harry Cleveland, whose Generosity they
had also heard of; for they concluded
it must be right for a Man to be generous
to a Woman, whatever was his
Motive: Tho' Lady Fanny could not
forbear insinuating on that Occasion,
that the Widow was accompanied to
Bristol by Two pretty Daughters; and
in her Heart was not the less inclined
to speak favourably of his Charity, for
imputing some Part of it to Motives
of Gallantry. 
Tho', in real Fact, Sir Harry, in what
he did on this Occasion, had not had
any Retrospect to Self whatsoever, not
even the least View to Miss Bilson's Approbation,
nor did he suppose it would 

ever reach her Knowlege; yet he was
not sorry that such was the accidental
Event, as he found that this Action had
raised hers, and her whole Family's,
Esteem for him: But yet, till they began
to talk of leaving Bristol, he could
not take Courage to explain his Views,
and request their Approbation and Interest
with their Daughter. 
This Proposal was no more than they
expected. They perceived the young
Lady was favourably disposed towards
him. But tho' his late Behaviour had
gained their Esteem, they were afraid
of giving their Daughter to a Man
who could be so easily led into Folly,
and whose Conduct they therefore apprehended
could not safely be depended
on in an Affair of such Consequence
for Life, as the Marriage of a
young Lady, who, as well as her Mother,
thought that a Woman's Happiness
consisted chiefly in domestic Pleasures. 

Miss Bilson also had the same Fears
with her Parents. Her Heart spoke
in favour of Sir Harry such as he then
was; but she knew not how he might
alter, and was sensible that there was
a Degree of Folly which would render
her as unhappy a Wife as if he became
vicious. In truth, there seems
to be no Reason why a Man who
moulders away his Understanding in
such Pursuits as are below an Infant,
should be nominated by a less reproachful
Appellation, than him who falls into
any other erroneous Conduct whatever. 
This Consideration made it difficult
to give Sir Harry an Answer correspondent
to his Wishes. His Fortune was
not sufficient Inducement to tempt
them to sacrifice a Daughter where
they thought she might be unhappy; 
and they could find no Way of treating
Sir Harry more genteelly, than by telling
him the Truth. He might justly
claim their Sincerity; and therefore 

they acquainted him with their Objections. 
It is easy to suppose that Sir Harry
omitted nothing he could urge to persuade
Mr. and Mrs. Bilson, that he was
entirely disgusted with the trifling, absurd
Follies, which justly gave Rise to
their Objection to him. But he could
prevail no farther, than to be looked
upon in a State of Probation; wherein
after he had spent a sufficient Time to
prove his Sincerity, if he continued unaltered,
he might expect to be accepted. 
He would gladly have passed his probationary
State in their Neighbourhood; 
but that they judged no Trial
of his Steadiness: For where he could
meet with no Temptation for his Vanity,
and in Sight of the beloved Mistress
of his Heart, he could not well
waver in his Resolutions: They therefore
required that he should spend some
Part of the Winter in London; at the 

same Time giving him Leave to make
them a Visit before he went thither,
and engaging to give him a very favourable
Reception, if he passed the
gay Season in Town unperverted. 
Sir Harry was obliged to acquiesce
in this Decision, as he found he could
obtain no better Terms; and was so
well assured of his own Steadiness, that
he looked on his Compliance with it
only as a Delay; but, as such, his Impatience
to call Miss Bilson his, made
him esteem them very cruel. He accepted
their Invitation, and made them
a Visit soon after they left Bristol; 
where, had it not been the End of
the Season, he could have found no
Temptation to stay after their Departure. 
His Mind was so strongly attached
to the valuable Treasure they
carried with them, that he found no
Pleasure in her Absence. 
I have some Reason to believe Miss
Bilson would have shortened the Term 

of his Probation, had it been left entirely
to her Decision; but she had
too just a Sense of the Obligation she
was under to that parental Affection
which was so tenderly apprehensive for
her Happiness, to give any the least Hint
of her Inclination: But when she saw
him set out for London, she had some
Fears, which shewed that she herself
was less assured of his steady Adherence
to Reason than she had before
imagined. 
The Result of Sir Harry Cleveland
must be left to be disclosed at a future
Opportunity; for it is now high Time
to return to the Lord and Lady who
are the principal Subjects of these Volumes. 




The Love of Flattery the chief Root of
being Dupes to the Treachery of others. 
Capt. Drumond, as is before intimated,
being now shaken off
by Sir Harry Cleveland, had fastened
wholly on Lord Dellwyn, whom he
found a Method of rendering greatly
subservient to his Convenience in a pecuniary
Way; and then, amongst his
other Acquaintance, thought proper to
make him a constant Subject, on which
he exercised his Talent of Sneering
and Ridiculing: A Practice which it
is earnestly to be wished was confined
only to such Persons as Capt. Drumond,
as it was perfectly uniform with every
other Part of his Character, which had
not been fully complete without this 

coinciding Addition; but it is a melancholy
Circumstance, whenever a
Man's Behaviour in this respect unavoidably
presents to the Memory the
following expressive Lines 

Who would not laugh, if such a Man there be?
But who'd not weep, if &wblank; were he?
Capt. Drumond had a great Inclination
to take Lord Dellwyn to nurse; a
Phrase I borrow from a late celebrated
Genius in the Science of getting Money; 
for when any Man of Fortune
had by Gaming, or by any other
chosen Method, so far dipped his
Estate, as to be utterly unable to satisfy
his own Appointments, and discharge
the Claims of his Creditors; this
our Genius, by his artful Management,
could contrive in a set Number of
Years to clear all the Debts, allow the
Owner a handsome Maintenance out
of it, and always bear in Remembrance
to be well rewarded for his Trouble. 

This he called taking an Estate to
nurse. It was remarkable, that often
the very Gentleman, who could not
contrive before to have sufficient for
his Expences from the Produce of his
whole superabundant Fortune, found
it very practicable to live within Compass,
when he was reduced to this
Allotment. 
There was one unfortunate Circumstance
attended this Inclination of Capt.
Drumond; for as Lord Dellwyn's
Estate was clear, he could not possibly
take that to nurse, unless he at the
same time took also the Incumbent; 
and he might be truly said to do so,
with great Propriety of Language; for
he humoured and treated him in every
respect like a Child. 
Lord Dellwyn's Gout and Confinement
rendered a ready Companion very
acceptable; and the Captain's continual
Repetitions of his own Merit,
like 


Drops of eating Water on the Marble,
at length forced its Way; and his Lordship
was convinced that Capt. Drumond
was brim-full of every cardinal
Virtue. It is observable, that every
Man (however wrong he may be in his
own Conduct) is desirous of a virtuous
Friend. Whether this arises from the
Apprehension of being injured by the
Baseness of those with whom they have
any Connexions, or from such a great
Degree of Affection for their Friends,
that they wish them better than themselves,
must be left without any Determination. 
The grand Point in which Lord
Dellwyn delighted to be flattered was,
that his Companion should discover,
either by his Looks or Motions, some
Appearances of Youth, or, at least, that
he was not yet arrived to any great
Age. The Captain was very penetrating
in this Particular, and often
perceived such Signs of juvenile Activity 

in his Lordship, as were imperceptible
to every other Eye. 
If a Man was to make choice of
the Dress of a Nurse, and resolve to
personate that Character at a Masquerade,
he would certainly furnish himself
with such Playthings as were fitted
to his Purpose; otherwise he would
very ill perform the Part he had undertaken. 
Capt. Drumond was full-fraught
with all such Knowlege as
could enable him properly to discharge
the Office he had assumed; and as the
well-shook Rattle will often stop the
Infant's Crying, even altho' it is not
perfectly free from Pain, so a well-timed
Compliment, importing Lord
Dellwyn's Youth, could even turn him
from his Peevishness. In fact, every
Man who feeds greedily on Flattery, is
in one respect full as weak, and as
easily imposed upon, as the smallest
Infant. Nor is there any designing
Man so ignorant, as not easily to perceive 

the Manner in which he can betray
another, who hath first betrayed
himself, by giving way to an Inclination
of ever beholding himself in a
false Mirror. 




A Capacity to digest, as necessary towards
extracting either Profit or Pleasure
from Reading, as outward Eyes themselves. 
Capt. Drumond had narrowly
watched every Motion of Lord
Dellwyn's Thoughts concerning his
Lady. He visibly perceived first by
what degrees his Indifference advanced,
and then marked the natural
Progress in his Mind to Anger and Indignation. 
By the Assistance of a fixed
Attention to this Subject, the Captain
found out that it would heartily coincide
with his Lordship's Inclinations to
be separated from his Lady; of which,
when he was fully convinced, he resolved
to point out a plain Method for 

his Lordship to obtain that Gratification,
by discovering Lady Dellwyn's Intimacy
with Lord Clermont. My Lord
gave him a very convenient Opportunity
for this Purpose, by declaring in
Conversation with him, that his Lady's
Virtue was his Misfortune, as it was
only a stronger Rivet to his Chain, and
made him despair of any Possibility of
being freed from her during his Life; 
at the same time producing the Instance
of her chearful Compliance with his
Request, in relation to avoiding the Conversation
of Lord Clermont, as a Proof
of her Virtue; concluding his Speech
with a deep Sigh, and saying, “And
you know, Capt. Drumond, that
she is some Years younger than I
am.” 
The Captain took his Cue; and, after
he had expressed a fulsome Compliment
on the Subject of his Lordship's
Age, the Discovery he had before
meditated began to stir and bustle
within him; but at first broke forth 

only in Shrugs and Sneers, and every
Suggestion that denotes Suspicion (often
best conveyed by proper Gestures,
without the Use of Words): A Practice
well known to Shakespeare; as is
plain, by his making Hamlet, when he
forbids Horatio's discovering what the
Ghost had declared, desire him also to
extend his Watchfulness even over his
Motions; 

That you, at such Time, seeing me, never shall,
With Arms encumb'red thus, or this Headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful Phrase,
As, well—we know—or, there be, and if there might—
(Or such ambiguous Giving-out) denote
That you know aught of me.
But Capt. Drumond was disappointed; 
and played over all his Gestures importing
his Suspicion of Lady Dellwyn,
to no manner of Purpose; for my
Lord was so fixed in his Opinion concerning 

his Lady's Virtue, that the
Captain was at last reduced to the Necessity
of cloathing his Thought in
Language of a much plainer Signification. 
Lord Dellwyn was not like
Othello; for he could talk very calmly
on this Subject; and, without any
Emotion, he argued the Improbability
of such a Supposition, continuing to
insist on the Reason above-mentioned: 
But the Captain, who bore a much
nearer Resemblance to Iago than his
Lordship did to the Moor, could turn
all Improbabilities into their reverse; 
and would not let slip such an Opportunity
of introducing an Outcry of her
Ladyship's superior Art and Cunning, in
affecting to shun the Man with whom
she intended the greatest Degree of Intimacy. 
This Outcry of Art, well-managed,
must stifle in its Birth every Possibility
of being justified from the falsest Accusation; 
and yet it is certainly sometimes
founded in Truth; otherwise the 

Dealers in Cunning would not themselves
ever be tempted to make use of
it, as it could then by no means be answerable
to their Purpose. This is
one of those intricate Labyrinths which
no human Penetration can unfold, and
a Proof of the Excellency of Milton's
Observation, that 

Hypocrisy walks unseen by any but God himself.
A Complication of Incidents afterwards
gave Lord Dellwyn many apparent Reasons
to admire Capt. Drumond's Sagacity,
from his Imputation of so great a
Degree of Art to Lady Dellwyn; 
whereas, in fact, her Actions were the
mere Productions of an unbridled Imagination,
and ungovernable Passions, of
that unreasonable Vanity with which
she was first infected by the dazling
Glare of Lady Fanny's Diamonds, on
that Birth-Night which had been so
fatal to all her future Happiness, which,
like deadly Poison, seemed to have 

taken so deep a Root, as to admit of no
Antidote to expel its Venom. It is
true, that the Object which was to
gratify this wild Vanity, varied according
to outward Circumstances; but
whether it consisted of Diamonds, an
Admirer, or any other imaginary valuable
Acquisition, yet the inward Motive
to Action was constantly the same,
and never varied. 
When Lord Dellwyn was inclined
to give Credit to Capt. Drumond's Conjectures,
then he was certain of his Intelligence,
and was eloquent on the
Subject of his mighty Attachment to
his Lordship; which he proved fully
to his own Satisfaction, by alleging
the great Trouble and Pains he had
undergone to make this friendly Discovery; 
but when his Lordship was
wavering, and doubtful of the Truth
of this Accusation of his Lady, then
the Captain's Words conveyed the same
Meaning with these of Iago: 


—I confess it is my Nature's Plague
To pry into Abuse; and oft my Jealousy
Shapes Faults that are not.
But tho' such was his Meaning, yet it
was very far from his Inclination to
quote this Passage. He rather wished
such strong Pictures as Shakespeare drew
of deep Villainy had never been written; 
for his Part, he could not believe
any such Monsters ever existed in any
other Place but in the whimsical Brains
of poetical Writers. But he had no
Occasion for being under any Apprehension
on this Account. The noble
Peer had never condescended to read
any thing so trifling as Shakespeare's
Plays; and, if he had perused them,
there was no manner of Danger that
he should know the Characters again in
real Life. 
There is a wide Difference between
reading with the Attention which is
necessary to digest, and extract Utility 

from Writings, and skimming over
the Surface of Authors, with the View
only of filling up a Chasm of Time,
which is not so fortunate as to be engaged
to some more entertaining
Amusement. The Vulgar have an
Expression concerning Reading which
is very remarkable: They call it reading
in a Book, or in Prant, without
making Distinction what it is; but if
they were to be told, that any thing
which is in a Book is in Nature also,
they would be astonished, and give no
Credit to such an Assertion; and, to
do them Justice, they are not always
mistaken in such their Judgment. 
It is very observable, with what uncommon
Judgment Shakespeare makes
Iago represent himself in such odious
Colours at the very Instant of Time in
which he is endeavouring to impose
himself as an honest Man, and a faithful
Friend, on Othello; as by this Conduct
he points out, in the most glaring
Light, how very little a Man has 

the Use of his own Senses whilst he is
under the Influence of any turbulent
Passion. 
Capt. Drumond also remembered to
give the same Turn to this natural Delight,
in raking in the Mire, and prying
into Abuse, with Iago. It was all employed
for his Friends. He acknowleged
that he was suspicious; but, conscious
that such a Confession was not
greatly for his Honour, he disavowed
absolutely having any Concern therein
for himself. Perhaps he was under a
Necessity of repeating continually the
little Word I, to prevent the Misfortune
of burying in Oblivion all Consideration
for himself. 
It hath been before hinted, that, besides
the double Use Capt. Drumond
made of Lord Dellwyn's Friendship, of
rendering it subservient to his pecuniary
Convenience, and also of introducing
him as a proper Object of Ridicule in
his Absence, that there was yet a 

third Gratification which he wished to
obtain from his Intimacy in his Lordship's
Family. But this was an Emolument
which could by no means be
brought about without the Consent of
Lady Dellwyn; and in this particular
Inclination he received the Mortification
of being disappointed; which
turned all his elaborate Profession of
Love into Rage, and highly piqued his
Pride; which, like a Soldier on Guard,
was ever ready to take the least Alarm,
and never suffered him to rest in Peace. 
His Apprehension of Contempt was
greater than any other Apprehension in
him whatever; for to deserve Contempt,
and to fear it, constantly go
together, and are inseparable Companions
in the same Bosom. And what
is a great Addition to this Misfortune,
there is but one Method of driving out
this Terror, when once it hath got Possession,
and that is, by forcibly entering
into such a Manner of Life as cannot
be accompanied by Self-contempt: 
But this perhaps might hurt as much 

as it did Lady Townly to think of
Amendment. 
The Manner of Lady Dellwyn's
treating Capt. Drumond was highly disrelishing
to his Palate; for she not
only absolutely disliked him, but was
filled with great Indignation at his Presumption. 
She agreed not at all with
him in his Sentiments of himself; for he
modestly thought that he was deserving
of every Woman's Love. However,
he could be tolerably pacified, whilst
he could flatter himself that Virtue, and
not that unpardonable Crime of disliking
him, was the Cause of his being
rejected. He therefore was but half
angry with Lady Dellwyn, till the Rumour
of her Favour to Lord Clermont
began first to creep about in murmuring
Whispers, and then proceeded to
flying with more open Licence from
Ear to Ear, from Assembly to Assembly; 
then was Capt. Drumond indeed
implacably revengeful; and as
open Power was wanting, insidious 

Dealing was necessary to bring about
his Purpose. 
It was customary with Capt. Drumond,
whenever he had entertained
any disadvantageous Conjecture of another,
privately to tax the Person suspected
with the Fact. It is true he
frequently found himself mistaken; for
however paradoxical it may at first View
appear, yet there is certainly nothing
oftener deceived than Suspicion. Then
he had a Sneer, and a loud Laugh,
ready to carry it off, by declaring that
it was only a Jest: But if, by the Result
of this sudden Manner of questioning,
he thought he had Reason to conclude
that he was right in his Conjecture,
then he had obtained his End, and
exulted in the Depth of his own Wisdom. 
In this manner he proceeded
with Lady Dellwyn, and had even Assurance
enough to give her such broad
Hints, as could not be misunderstood,
that he was not ignorant of her Commerce
with Lord Clermont; at the 

same time letting her understand, that
there was but one only Method by
which she had the Power of bribing
him to Silence, or to keep the Secret
even from her Lord himself. 
The Captain however laboured herein
under a small Error; for Lady Dellwyn
was not to be terrified into a Compliance
with his base Proposals by all
his Menaces. She was too much mortified
within her own Bosom to be very
fearful of Consequences; and the same
Vanity which had long been her principal
actuating Motive, now told her,
that it would be better for her to retire
to some obscure Corner of the World,
where she might be no more seen or
heard of, than to appear amongst Mankind
with Infamy. She detested such
a mean Artifice; and, by the proper
Scorn with which she treated Capt.
Drumond, she plainly proved, that she
must first be her own Dupe, before she
was liable to become that of another; 
which is the Case much more generally 

than is imagined, and, if taken
into serious Consideration, would preserve
the well-meaning Part of Mankind
from many Misfortunes, and frequently
baffle all the cunning Stratagems
of deceitful Treachery. 




A Piece of Art of Capt. Drumond's,
which he called an ingenious Device. 
Capt. Drumond from henceforth
collected all his Force, and displayed
the whole Artillery of his Cunning,
for the Management of Lord
Dellwyn; and ceased all farther fruitless
Attempts on his Lady, for whom
there remained no other Passion in his
Bosom, but that of Rage, and a Desire
of Revenge; which were indeed the
Passions that were most apt to be uppermost
in his Mind. He also considered
a Separation of Lord and Lady
Dellwyn as a necessary Incident towards
his taking full Possession of my Lord
without a Rival; for her Ladyship
knew so much of him, that she could 

not possibly be mistaken in his true
Character. 
But the Captain was very well-provided
against any ill Effects her Knowlege
of him could possibly have in her Representations
of him to her Lord. His
Inclination for Lady Dellwyn's Beauty
had not Power enough to blot out of
his Memory the principal View of all
his Actions, or render him neglectful
in any Point wherein his future Interest
was concerned; for when he first grew
fully convinced that Lady Dellwyn was
engaged in an Intrigue with Lord Clermont,
and had resolved on the Use he
would make of it, he began to consider
of the Means of acquiring stronger
Proof than his Word, modestly judging
such might be necessary; nor would
her Ladyship's Compliance with his
amorous Desires have prevailed with
him to have dropt the Pursuit of what
he thought might prove a future lucrative
Advantage to him, unless she would
also have agreed to use her utmost Endeavours 

that he should share in the
spending as much of her Lord's Fortune
as their joint Interest could by any
means obtain from him. But this was
a Proposal to come in Course, after the
first had met with a kind Reception. 
But his ill Success in that Point engaged
his Rage as well as Policy, to leave no
Means unattempted by which he could
hope to pursue her to Destruction. 
The Method most suitable to the
Meanness of his Disposition, was bribing
her Ladyship's Servant. But in this he
was disappointed, for he found the
Maid was not let into the Secret. The
Lovers saw each other too frequently to
have occasion for a Confidante. The
first thing therefore that he resolved to
attempt, was to make such an Assistant
necessary. 
In order to effect this Scheme, Capt.
Drumond renewed, and even increased,
his Assiduities to Lady Dellwyn, and
contrived to place himself constantly at 

her Elbow; nor could the utmost
Slights, or even almost Rudeness, from
her, make him change his Purpose; by
which means Lord Clermont sometimes
should not be able for Two or Three
Days together to utter one Syllable to
her unheard. 
This Impertinence produced the
Consequence Capt. Drumond hoped
from it. Lord Clermont found it necessary
to use Pen and Ink to convey
Sentiments which he used to whisper
in the Lady's Ear; and this epistolary
Correspondence converted Lady Dellwyn's
Servant from an humble Attendant
to an insolent Confidante. 
The Bribe had been offered to the
Maid before she had any Hopes of deserving
it: But she very plainly proved
that Opportunity alone was wanting; 
for she no sooner had the Power of betraying
her Lady put into her Hands,
than she resolved to make use of it; 
and whenever Capt. Drumond had by 

this Play reduced Lord Clermont to the
Necessity of Writing, she carried the
Letters immediately to the Captain,
who imitated his Lordship's Hand (for
he was skilful in every Requisite for
Treachery and Deceit) so dexterously,
as to impose on a Person who had had
some little Acquaintance with it; 
which he had Reason to believe her
Ladyship had not, because he knew
the Maid had never before been so
employed. 
These Copies the Captain returned
to the Maid to convey to her Lady; 
whilst he himself laid up the Originals,
with as much Care as if they had been
the Deeds of an Estate, resolving by
their means to effectuate his own invidious
Purpose. 
He pursued this Method till he had
got what was sufficient for his Design; 
nor did it require any great
Number, for the chief Purpose of them
was to fix some Place of Meeting. The 

same Deceit was employed in respect
to Lady Dellwyn's Answers; and by
these Means he was furnished with all
the Proof that he thought necessary. 
No Consequence of Lady Dellwyn's
criminal Vanity distressed her more
than being thus put in the Power of
her Servant. She saw both the Danger
and the Meanness of such a Proceeding,
and indeed felt it severely in the Insolence
of the Person thus trusted. Nor
could she have any reasonable Expectations
of better Treatment. If her
Servant had had any Sense of Virtue,
she would not have been made an
Instrument in carrying on a Correspondence,
the visible Tendency of which
must be so very contrary to all that
could be called virtuous; and what
could be hoped from one without
Principle, but that she would tyrannically
use the Power so ill-acquired? 
Lady Dellwyn was so sensible of this
Consequence, that nothing could have 

prevailed with her to consent to such a
Step; but Lord Clermont, presuming
on the Privilege of a favoured Lover,
had asked no such Permission. And
the Servant gave her so plainly to understand
how much she was in her
Power after the first Letter she delivered
her, that Lady Dellwyn perceived
all future Care would be to no purpose; 
and therefore she did not forbid
the Continuance of it. Besides, the
Maid's Power was real, and not of
her own Imagination; for her Lady
now neither durst venture to turn her
away or provoke her, for fear of a Discovery
to her Lord, who she hoped
was yet ignorant of her Conduct. 
Fraught with these valuable Materials
for Mischief, when Capt. Drumond
had fully awakened Lord Dellwyn's
Jealousy, and excited in him a
strong Desire for Proof, as convincing
to a Court of Justice as his Suspicions
were to himself, the Captain produced
his Letters; which he accompanied 

with informing his Lordship of
the infinite Labour he had been at to
procure them; a Task which he protested
nothing could have induced him
to undertake, but his Desire of serving
a Person to whom he was so entirely
devoted, as on that Account even to
prevail on himself to act contrary to
that fair and open Method of dealing,
which had hitherto been the constant
Guide of his Practice. 
Lord Dellwyn was as lavish in his
Expressions of Gratitude, as the other
was of Professions of his own Honour
and Worth; not that he really believed
a Man who was not capable of acting
treacherously for himself, would be so
kind as to do it for another; a Degree
of Absurdity too great for any human
Understanding to fall into; but his
Lordship did not make this Part of
the Captain's Discourse so much the
Subject of his Consideration as either
to give or with-hold his Assent. He
had now got into his Hands the Means 

of gratifying what was then the very
uppermost Wish of his Heart, the Desire
of an absolute Divorce from his
Lady, and was too well pleased therewith
to be delicate about the Method by
which they were procured. He left that
Consideration entirely to the Person to
whom it indeed seemed chiefly to belong,
to him who had carried through
such a Transaction, in order to ingratiate
himself with his Lordship. 
Lady Dellwyn never imagined that
her Lord would take any other Measures
with her, than to part with her
privately, without declaring his Reasons
to the World; and she doubted
not but that he had Generosity enough
to support her in some degree in the
Station to which he had raised her; 
and, if his Lordship had thought proper
to have acted as she hoped, she
knew that she should not greatly regret
the Separation. But herein she was
mistaken; for Lord Dellwyn declared
his Resolution of instituting a Suit in 

Doctors Commons. This indeed truly
startled and terrified her. But still she
hoped these were only vain Menaces,
for she little imagined his Lordship had
Materials to enable him to keep his
Word. But he would not long leave
her the Consolation of this fallacious
Hope, acquainting her with the Proofs
of which he was possessed. 
This indeed was a Shock almost
greater than her Frame could support. 
To submit to public Shame, and have
her Name branded in a Court of Justice,
were Circumstances too mortifying
for her to think of with any tolerable
Degree of Patience. She offered
to comply with whatever Terms her
Lord pleased. She prayed, wept, and
intreated him to forego this Resolution. 
But Capt. Drumond's Revenge for her
Scorn was not to be so satisfied. Her
Susceptibility of Shame was the Delight
of his Heart, as it supplied him with
an Opportunity of mortifying her more
thoroughly than he could possibly have 

done otherwise, had she been less tender
in this Point; and there was no
Probability that he would ever suffer
my Lord to cool in his Purpose before
it was put in Execution. 
From the Moment that Lord Dellwyn
had, by the Disappointment of his
Hopes to obtain his Lady's Affections,
opened his Eyes, and made the Discovery
that it would have been a superior
Degree of Wisdom not to have
married Miss Lucum, a certain Degree
of Indignation had insinuated itself into
his Bosom against Mr. Lucum, his
Lady's Father, for having been one
Instrument of bringing on him his Misfortunes. 
Whenever Blame must fall
on any one of the Parties engaged in a
Transaction, every Individual carries
about him a Battledore to strike the
Shuttlecock from himself. This Indignation
arose at length to such a
Height, that it was painful to conceal
it, and by degrees was very apparent
to his Friend Capt. Drumond, who 

kept a constant Watch over every Motion
of his Mind, and was ever prepared
to turn every new Incident to
his own Advantage. 
The Captain was not long before he
recollected many Persons who, in their
own Opinion, had very just Claims to
the lucrative Employment of which,
by Lord Dellwyn's Interest, Mr. Lucum
was in present Possession; but fixed
his Thoughts more particularly on one
Gentleman, who was profuse in his
Expences, and whose pecuniary Power
was by no means answerable to his Desires. 
In such a Situation Capt. Drumond
doubted not but that any Prospect
of an additional Income would be very
heartily welcomed. To this Gentleman
therefore he contrived to convey
an Intimation of the Terms on which
he might probably supersede Mr. Lucum. 
The Bargain was soon finished; 
and thus Lord Dellwyn's Interest was
bought and sold without his Knowlege; 
and the Captain never ceased 

importuning his Lordship till he had
obtained his Consent for the Accomplishment
of the Promise he made unknown
to my Lord, to whom he only
represented the Worth and Honour of
the Gentleman he would recommend; 
to which, as Lord Dellwyn had no Acquaintance
with him, he gave implicit
Credit; for he was thoroughly convinced
that Mr. Lucum, who had incurred
his Displeasure, was now become
perfectly unworthy of any future
Favour. 

The END of the Third Book.