




A very short Chapter, and consequently requiring
no Preface. 
Mrs. Bennet having fastened the
Door, and both the Ladies having
taken their Places, she once
or twice offered to speak, when Passion
stopt her Utterance; and after a Minute's
Silence she burst into a Flood of Tears. 
Upon which Amelia expressing the utmost
Tenderness for her, as well by her Look
as by her Accent; cry'd–––‘What can
be the Reason, dear Madam, of all this
Emotion?’ –––‘O Mrs. Booth,’ answered
she,–––‘I find I have undertaken what I
am not able to perform–––You would
not wonder at my Emotion, if you knew 

you had an Adulteress and a Murderer
now standing before you.’ 
Amelia turned pale as Death at these
Words, which Mrs. Bennet observing,
collected all the Force she was able, and
a little composing her Countenance, cry'd,
‘I see, Madam, I have terrified you with
such dreadful Words; but I hope you
will not think me guilty of these Crimes
in the blackest Degree.’ –––‘Guilty!’ 
cries Amelia. ‘Oh Heavens!’ ‘I believe
indeed your Candour,’ continued Mrs.
Bennet, ‘will be readier to acquit me
than I am to acquit myself––Indiscretion,
at least, the highest, most unpardonable
Indiscretion, I shall always lay to my
own Charge; and when I reflect on the
fatal Consequences, I can never, never
forgive myself.’ Here she again began
to lament in so bitter a manner,
that Amelia endeavoured, as much as she
could (for she was herself greatly shocked)
to sooth and comfort her; telling her, that
if Indiscretion was her highest Crime, the
unhappy Consequences made her rather
an unfortunate than a guilty Person; and
concluded by saying,–––‘Indeed, Madam,
you have raised my Curiosity to the 

highest Pitch, and I beg you will proceed
with your Story.’ 
Mrs. Bennet then seemed a second time
going to begin her Relation, when she
cried out, ‘I would, if possible, tire you
with no more of my unfortunate Life
than just with that Part which leads to a
Catastrophe, in which I think you may
yourself be interested; but I protest I
am at a Loss where to begin.’ 
‘Begin wherever you please, dear Madam,’ 
cries Amelia; ‘but I beg you will
consider my Impatience.’ ‘I do consider
it,’ answered Mrs. Bennet; ‘And therefore
would begin with that Part of my
Story which leads directly to what concerns
yourself: For how, indeed, should
my Life produce any thing worthy your
Notice?’ –––‘Do not say so, Madam,’ cries
Amelia, ‘I assure you I have long suspected
there were some very remarkable Incidents
in your Life, and have only
wanted an Opportunity to impart to you
my Desire of hearing them: –––I beg
therefore you would make no more
Apologies.’ —‘I will not, Madam,’ 
cries Mrs. Bennet, ‘And yet I would 

avoid any thing trivial; tho', indeed, in
Stories of Distress, especially where
Love is concerned, many little Incidents
may appear trivial to those who
have never felt the Passion, which to
delicate Minds are the most interesting
Part of the Whole.’ —‘Nay but, dear
Madam,’ cries Amelia,’ ‘This is all
Preface.’— 
‘Well, Madam,’ answered Mrs. Bennet,
‘I will consider your Impatience.’ She
then rallied all her Spirits in the best
Manner she could, and began as is
written in the next Chaper. 
And here possibly the Reader will blame
Mrs. Bennet for taking her Story so far
back, and relating so much of her Life
in which Amelia had no Concern; but in
Truth, she was desirous of inculcating a
good Opinion of herself, from recounting
those Transactions where her Conduct was
unexceptionable, before she came to the
more dangerous and suspicious Part of her
Character. This I really suppose to have
been her Intention: For to sacrifice the
Time and Patience of Amelia at such a
Season, to the mere Love of Talking of 

herself, would have been as unpardonable
in her, as the bearing it was in Amelia
a Proof of the most perfect good Breeding. 



The Beginning of Mrs. Bennet's History. 
‘I was the younger of two Daughters
of a Clergyman in Essex; of one in
whose Praise if I should indulge my fond
Heart in speaking, I think my Invention
could not outgo the Reality. He
was indeed well worthy of the Cloth he
wore; and that, I think, is the highest
Character a Man can obtain. 
‘During the first Part of my Life,
even 'till I reached my Sixteenth Year,
I can recollect nothing to relate to
you. All was one long serene Day, in
looking back upon which, as when we
cast our Eyes on a calm Sea, no Object
arises to my View. All appears one
Scene of Happiness and Tranquillity. 
‘On the Day, then, when I became sixteen
Years old, must I begin my History; 

for on that Day, I first tasted the Bitterness
of Sorrow. 
‘My Father, besides those prescribed
by our Religion, kept five Festivals
every Year. These were on his Wedding-Day,
and on the Birth-Day of each
of his little Family. On these Occasions
he used to invite two or three
Neighbours to his House, and to indulge
himself, as he said, in great Excess: 
For so he called drinking a Pint
of very small Punch; and indeed it
might appear Excess to one who on other
Days rarely tasted any Liquor stronger
than small Beer. 
‘Upon my unfortunate Birth-Day then,
when we were all in a high Degree of
Mirth, my Mother having left the
Room after Dinner, and staying away
pretty long, my Father sent me to see
for her. I went according to his Orders; 
but tho' I searched the whole House,
and called after her without Doors, I
could neither see nor hear her. I was a
little alarmed at this (tho' far from
suspecting any great Mischief had befallen
her) and ran back to acquaint my
Father, who answered coolly, (for he 

was a Man of the calmest Temper,)
“Very well, my Dear, I suppose she is
not gone far, and will be here immediately.’ 
Half an Hour or more past
after this, when, she not returning, my
Father himself expressed some Surprize
at her Stay; declaring, it must be some
Matter of Importance which could detain
her at that time from her Company. 
His Surprize now encreased every Minute; 
and he began to grow uneasy, and
to shew sufficient Symptoms in his Countenance
of what he felt within. He
then dispatched the Servant Maid to
enquire after her Mistress in the Parish; 
but waited not her Return; for she was
scarce gone out of Doors, before he
begged Leave of his Guests to go himself
on the same Errand. The Company
now all broke up, and attended my
Father, all endeavouring to give him
Hopes that no Mischief had happened. 
They searched the whole Parish; but in
vain: They could neither see my Mother
nor hear any News of her. My Father
returned home in a State little short of
Distraction. His Friends in vain attempted
to administer either Advice or
Comfort; he threw himself on the Floor
in the most bitter Agonies of Despair. 

‘Whilst he lay in this Condition, my
Sister and myself lying by him all equally,
I believe, and completely miserable,
our old Servant Maid, came into the
Room, and cried out, her Mind misgave
her that she knew where her Mistress
was. Upon these Words my Father
sprung from the Floor, and asked her
eagerly, where? —But oh! Mrs. Booth,
how can I describe the Particulars of a
Scene to you, the Remembrance of
which chills my Blood with Horror, and
which the Agonies of my Mind, when
it past, made all a Scene of Confusion! 
The Fact then in short was this; my
Mother, who was a most indulgent Mistress
to one Servant, which was all we
kept, was unwilling, I suppose, to disturb
her at her Dinner; and therefore went
herself to fill her Tea-Kettle at a Well,
into which stretching herself too far,
as we imagine, the Water then being
very low, she fell with the Tea-Kettle
in her Hand. The missing this gave
the poor old Wretch the first Hint of
her Suspicion, which upon Examination
was found to be too well grounded. 

‘What we all suffered on this Occasion
may more easily be felt than described. 
—“It may indeed,” answered Amelia,
“and I am so sensible of it, that unless
you have a Mind to see me faint before
your Face, I beg you will order me
something; a Glass of Water, if you
please.” Mrs. Bennet immediately complied
with her Friend's Request; a Glass
of Water was brought, and some Hartshorn
Drops infused into it: Which Amelia
having drank off, declared she found herself
much better; and then Mrs. Bennet
proceeded thus. 
‘I will not dwell on a Scene which I
see hath already so much affected your
tender Heart, and which is as disagreeable
to me to relate, as it can be to you
to hear. I will therefore only mention
to you the Behaviour of my Father on
this Occasion, which was indeed becoming
a Philosopher and a Christian
Divine. On the Day after my Mother's
Funeral, he sent for my Sister and myself
into his Room; where, after many
Caresses, and every Demonstration of
Fatherly Tenderness, as well in Silence
as in Words, he began to exhort us to 

bear with Patience the great Calamity
that had befallen us; saying, “That
as every human Accident, how terrible
soever, must happen to us by Divine
Permission at least, a due Sense of our
Duty to our great Creator, must teach
us an absolute Submission to his Will. 
Not only Religion, but Common Sense
must teach us this: For Oh! my dear
Children, cries he, How vain is all Resistance,
all Repining! Could Tears
wash back again my Angel from the
Grave, I should drain all the Juices of
my Body through my Eyes; but oh,
could we fill up that cursed Well with
our Tears, how fruitless would be all
our Sorrow!” –––‘I think I repeat you
his very Words: For the Impression
they made on me is never to be obliterated. 
–––He then proceeded to comfort us
with the chearful Thought that the Loss
was entirely our own, and that my
Mother was greatly a Gainer by the
Accident which we lamented. I have
a Wife,” cries he, “my Children, and
you have a Mother now amongst the
Heavenly Choir: How selfish therefore
is all our Grief! How cruel to her are
all our Wishes!” –––In this Manner he
talked to us near half an Hour, tho' I 

must frankly own to you, his Arguments
had not the immediate good Effect on
us which they deserved: For we retired
from him very little the better for his
Exhortations; however, they became
every Day more and more forcible upon
our Recollection; indeed they were greatly
strengthened by his Example: For in
this, as in all other Instances, he practised
the Doctrines which he taught. From
this Day he never mentioned my Mother
more, and soon after recovered his usual
Cheerfulness in Public; tho' I have Reason
to think he paid many a bitter Sigh
in private to that Remembrance which
neither Philosophy nor Christianity could
expunge. 
‘My Father's Advice, enforced by his
Example, together with the Kindness
of some of our Friends, assisted by that
ablest of all the mental Physicians,
Time, in a few Months pretty well restored
my Tranquillity, when Fortune
made a second Attack on my Quiet. 
My Sister, whom I dearly loved, and
who as warmly returned my Affection,
had fallen into an ill State of Health
some time before the fatal Accident
which I have related. She was indeed 

at that Time so much better, that we had
great Hopes of her perfect Recovery; 
but the Disorders of her Mind on that
dreadful Occasion so affected her Body,
that she presently relapsed to her former
declining State, and thence grew continually
worse and worse, till after a Decay
of near seven Months, she followed my
poor Mother to the Grave. 
‘I will not tire you, dear Madam,
with Repetitions of Grief; I will only
mention two Observations which have
occurred to me from Reflections on the
two Losses I have mentioned. The
first is, that a Mind once violently hurt
grows, as it were, callous to any future
Impressions of Grief; and is never
capable of feeling the same Pangs a
second Time. The other Observation
is, that the Arrows of Fortune, as well
as all others, derive their Force from
the Velocity with which they are discharged: 
For when they approach you
by slow and perceptible Degrees, they
have but very little Power to do you
Mischief. 
‘The truth of these Observations I
experienced, not only in my own Heart, 

but in the Behaviour of my Father,
whose Philosophy seemed to gain a complete
Triumph over this latter Calamity. 
‘Our Family was now reduced to two; 
and my Father grew extremely fond
of me, as if he had now conferred an
entire Stock of Affection on me, that
had before been divided. His Words
indeed testified no less: For he daily
called me his only Darling, his whole
Comfort, his All. He committed the
whole Charge of his House to my Care,
and gave me the Name of his little
House-keeper, an Appellation of which
I was then as proud as any Minister of
State can be of his Titles. But tho' I
was very industrious in the Discharge of
my Occupation, I did not, however,
neglect my Studies, in which I had
made so great a Proficiency, that I was
become a pretty good Mistress of the
Latin Language, and had made some
Progress in the Greek. I believe, Madam,
I have formerly acquainted you,
that Learning was the chief Estate I inherited
of my Father, in which he had
instructed me from my earliest Youth. 

‘The Kindness of this good Man had
at length wiped off the Remembrance
of all Losses; and I, during two Years,
led a Life of great Tranquillity, I think
I might almost say of perfect Happiness. 
‘I was now in the nineteenth Year of
my Age, when my Father's good Fortune
removed us from the County of
Essex into Hampshire, where a Living
was conferred on him by one of his old
School-fellows, of twice the Value of
what he was before possessed of. 
‘His Predecessor in this new Living
had died in very indifferent Circumstances,
and had left behind him a
Widow with two small Children. My
Father, therefore, who with great Œconomy
had a most generous Soul, bought
the whole Furniture of the Parsonage-house
at a very high Price; some of it
indeed he would have wanted: For tho'
our little Habitation in Essex was most
completely furnished; yet it bore no
Proportion to the Largeness of that
House in which he was now to dwell. 

‘His Motive, however, to the Purchase
was, I am convinced, solely Generosity; 
which appeared sufficiently by
the Price he gave, and may be farther
inforced by the Kindness he shewed the
Widow in another Instance: For he
assigned her an Apartment for the Use
of herself and her little Family; which
he told her, she was welcome to enjoy
as long as it suited her Conveniency. 
‘As this Widow was very young, and
generally thought to be tolerably pretty,
tho' I own she had a Cast with her Eyes
which I never liked, my Father, you
may suppose, acted from a less noble
Principle than I have hinted: But I
must in Justice acquit him; for these
kind Offers were made her before ever
he had seen her Face; and I have the
greatest Reason to think, that for a long
Time after he had seen her, he beheld
her with much Indifference. 
‘This Act of my Father's gave me,
when I first heard it, great Satisfaction: 
For I may, at least with the Modesty
of the ancient Philosophers, call myself
a Lover of Generosity; but when 

I became acquainted with the Widow,
I was still more delighted with what
my Father had done: For tho' I could
not agree with those who thought her a
consummate Beauty, I must allow that
she was very fully possessed of the Power
of making herself agreeable; and this
Power she exerted with so much Success,
with such indefatigable Industry to oblige,
that within three Months I became
in the highest Manner pleased with
my new Acquaintance, and had contracted
the most sincere Friendship for
her. 
‘But if I was so pleased with the
Widow, my Father was by this Time
enamoured of her. She had, indeed,
by the most artful Conduct in the World,
so insinuated herself into his Favour, so
entirely infatuated him, that he never
shewed the least Marks of Cheerfulness
in her Absence, and could, in Truth,
scarce bear that she should be out of
his Sight. 
‘She had managed this Matter so well,
(O she is the most artful of Women!)
that my Father's Heart was gone before
I ever suspected it was in Danger. The 

Discovery, you may easily believe, Madam,
was not pleasing. The Name of
a Mother-in-law founded dreadful in my
Ears, nor could I bear the Thought of
parting again with a Share in those dear
Affections, of which I had purchased
the Whole by the Loss of a beloved
Mother and Sister. 
‘In the first Hurry and Disorder of
my Mind on this Occasion, I committed
a Crime of the highest Kind against all
the Laws of Prudence and Discretion. 
I took the young Lady herself very
roundly to Task, treated her Designs
on my Father as little better than a Design
to commit a Theft; and in my
Passion, I believe, said she might be
ashamed to think of marrying a Man
old enough to be her Grandfather: For
so in Reality he almost was. 
‘The Lady on this Occasion acted
finely the Part of a Hypocrite. She
affected to be highly affronted at my
unjust Suspicions, as she called them,
and proceeded to such Asseverations of
her Innocence, that she almost brought
me to discredit the Evidence of my own
Eyes and Ears. 

‘My Father, however, acted much
more honestly: For he fell the next
Day into a more violent Passion with me
than I had ever seen him in before, and
asked me, whether I intended to return
his paternal Fondness by assuming the
Right of controlling his Inclinations?
with more of the like Kind, which fully
convinced me what had passed between
him and the Lady, and how little I had
injured her in my Suspicions. 
‘Hitherto I frankly own my Aversion
to this Match had been principally on
my own Account: For I had no ill Opinion
of the Woman, tho' I thought
neither her Circumstances nor my Father's
Age promised any Kind of Felicity
from such an Union; but now
I learnt some Particulars, which, had
not our Quarrel become public in the
Parish, I should perhaps have never
known. In short, I was informed, that
this gentle obliging Creature, as she had
at first appeared to me, had the Spirit
of a Tigress, and was by many believed to
have broken the Heart of her first Husband. 

‘The Truth of this Matter being confirmed
to me upon Examination, I resolved
not to suppress it. On this Occasion
Fortune seemed to favour me,
by giving me a speedy Opportunity of
seeing my Father alone and in good
Humour. He now first began to open
his intended Marriage, telling me that
he had formerly had some religious Objections
to Bigamy, but he had very
fully considered the Matter, and had
satisfied himself of its Legality. He
then faithfully promised me, that no
second Marriage should in the least impair
his Affection for me; and concluded
with the highest Elogiums on the
Goodness of the Widow, protesting that
it was her Virtues and not her Person
with which he was enamoured. 
‘I now fell upon my Knees before him,
and bathing his Hand in my Tears,
which flowed very plentifully from my
Eyes, acquainted him with all I had
heard; and was so very imprudent, I
might almost say so cruel, to disclose the
Author of my Information. 

‘My Father heard me without any Indication
of Passion; and answered coldly,
that if there was any Proof of such
Facts, he should decline any further
Thoughts of his Match; “But Child,” 
said he, “tho' I am far from suspecting
the Truth of what you tell me, as far
as regards your Knowledge; yet you
know the Inclination of the World to
Slander.” However, before we parted
he promised to make a proper Enquiry
into what I had told him. –––But I ask
your Pardon, dear Madam, I am running
minutely into those Particulars of
my Life, in which you have not the
least Concern.’ 
Amelia stopt her Friend short in her
Apology, and tho', perhaps, she thought
her impertinent enough, yet, (such was
her good Breeding) she gave her many
Assurances of a Curiosity to know every
Incident of her Life which she could
remember; after which Mrs. Bennet proceeded
as in the next Chapter. 




Continuation of Mrs. Bennet's Story. 
‘I think, Madam,’ said Mrs. Bennet,
‘I told you my Father promised
me to enquire farther into the
Affair; but he had hardly Time to
keep his Word: For we separated pretty
late in the Evening, and early the next
Morning he was married to the Widow. 
‘But tho' he gave no Credit to my Information,
I had sufficient Reason to
think he did not forget it, by the Resentment
which he soon discovered to
both the Persons whom I had named as
my Informers. 
‘Nor was it long before I had good
Cause to believe, that my Father's new
Wife was perfectly well acquainted with
the good Opinion I had of her, not
only from her Usage of me, but from
certain Hints which she threw forth
with an Air of Triumph. One Day
particularly I remember she said to my
Father, upon his mentioning his Age,
“O, my Dear, I hope you have many 

Years yet to live; unless, indeed, I
should be so cruel as to break your
Heart.” She spoke these Words looking
me full in the Face, and accompanied
them with a Sneer, in which the
highest Malice was visible under a thin
Covering of affected Pleasantry. 
‘I will not entertain you, Madam,
with any Thing so common as the cruel
Usage of a Step-mother; nor of
what affected me much more, the unkind
Behaviour of a Father under such
an Influence. It shall suffice only to tell
you, that I had the Mortification to
perceive the gradual and daily Decrease
of my Father's Affection. His Smiles
were converted into Frowns; the tender
Appellations of Child, and Dear, were
exchanged for plain Molly, that Girl,
that Creature, and sometimes much
harder Names. I was at first turned all
at once into a Cypher, and at last seemed
to be considered as a Nusance in the
Family. 
‘Thus altered was the Man of whom
I gave you such a Character at the Entrance
on my Story; but alas! he no
longer acted from his own excellent 

Disposition; but was in every thing governed
and directed by my Mother-in-Law. 
In Fact, whenever there is great
Disparity of Years between Husband
and Wife, the Younger is, I believe,
always possessed of absolute Power over
the Elder: For Superstition itself is a
less firm Support of absolute Power
than Dotage. 
‘But tho' his Wife was so entirely
Mistress of my Father's Will, that she
could make him use me ill, she could
not so perfectly subdue his Understanding,
as to prevent him from being conscious
of such ill Usage; and from this
Consciousness he began inveterately to
hate me. Of this Hatred he gave me
numberless Instances, and I protest to
you, I know not any other Reason for
it than what I have assigned; and the
Cause, as Experience hath convinced
me, is adequate to the Effect. 
‘While I was in this wretched Situation,
my Father's Unkindness having
almost broken my Heart, he came one
Day into my Room with more Anger
in his Countenance than I had ever seen; 
and after bitterly upbraiding me with 

my undutiful Behaviour both to himself
and his worthy Consort, he bid me pack
up my Alls, and immediately prepare to
quit his House; at the same time gave
me a Letter, and told me that would
acquaint me where I might find a Home; 
adding, that he doubted not but I expected
and had indeed solicited the Invitation; 
and left me with a Declaration
that he would have no Spies in his
Family. 
‘The Letter I found on opening it,
was from my Father's own Sister; but
before I mention the Contents, I will
give you a short Sketch of her Character,
as it was somewhat particular. Her
personal Charms were not great; for
she was very tall, very thin, and very
homely. Of the Defect of her Beauty
she was perhaps sensible; her Vanity
therefore retreated into her Mind, where
there is no Looking-Glass, and consequently
where we can flatter ourselves
with discovering almost whatever Beauties
we please. This is an encouraging
Circumstance; and yet I have observed,
dear Mrs. Booth, that few Women, ever
seek these Comforts from within, till
they are driven to it by Despair of finding 

any Food for their Vanity from
without. Indeed, I believe, the first
Wish of our whole Sex is to be handsome.’ 
Here both the Ladies fixed their Eyes
on the Glass, and both smiled. 
‘My Aunt, however,’ continued Mrs.
Bennet, ‘from Despair of gaining any
Applause this Way, had applied herself
entirely to the Contemplation of her
Understanding, and had improved this
to such a Pitch, that at the Age of
Fifty, at which she was now arrived,
she had contracted a hearty Contempt
for much the greater Part of both Sexes; 
for the Women, as being Idiots, and
for the Men, as the Admirers of Idiots. 
That Word and Fool were almost constantly
in her Mouth, and were bestowed
with great Liberality among all her
Acquaintance. 
‘This Lady had spent one Day only
at my Father's House in near two Years. 
It was about a Month before his second
Marriage. At her Departure she took
Occasion to whisper me her Opinion of
the Widow, whom she called a pretty 

Idiot, and wondered how her Brother
could bear such Company under
his Roof; for neither she nor I had at
that Time any Suspicion of what afterwards
happened. 
‘The Letter which my Father had just
received, and which was the first she
had sent him since his Marriage, was of
such a Nature, that I should be unjust
if I blamed him for being offended; 
Fool and Idiot were both plentifully
bestowed in it as well on himself as on his
Wife. But what, perhaps, had principally
offended him, was that Part which
related to me: For after much Panegyric
on my Understanding, and saying
he was unworthy of such a Daughter,
she considered his Match not only as
the highest Indiscretion, as it related to
himself; but as a downright Act of Injustice
to me. One Expression in it I
shall never forget. “You have placed,” 
said she, “a Woman above your
Daughter, who, in Understanding, the
only valuable Gift of Nature, is the
lowest in the whole Class of pretty
Idiots.” ‘After much more of this
Kind, it concluded with inviting me
to her House. 

‘I can truly say, that when I had read
the Letter, I entirely forgave my Father's
Suspicion, that I had made some
Complaints to my Aunt of his Behaviour: 
For tho' I was indeed innocent,
there was surely Colour enough to suspect
the contrary. 
‘Tho' I had never been greatly attached
to my Aunt, nor indeed had she
formerly given me any Reason for such
an Attachment; yet I was well enough
pleased with her present Invitation. To
say the Truth, I led so wretched a Life
where I then was, that it was impossible
not to be a Gainer by any Exchange. 
‘I could not, however, bear the
Thoughts of leaving my Father with
an Impression on his Mind against me
which I did not deserve. I endeavoured
therefore to remove all his Suspicion of
my having complained to my Aunt by
the most earnest Asseverations of my
Innocence; but they were all to no
Purpose. All my Tears, all my Vows,
and all my Entreaties were fruitless. 
My new Mother indeed appeared to be
my Advocate; but she acted her Part 

very poorly, and far from counterfeiting
any Desire of succeeding in my
Suit, she could not conceal the excessive
Joy which she felt on the Occasion. 
‘Well, Madam, the next Day I departed
for my Aunt's, where after a
long Journey of forty Miles, I arrived
without having once broke my Fast on
the Road: For Grief is as capable as
Food of filling the Stomach; and I had
too much of the former to admit any
of the latter. The Fatigue of my
Journey and the Agitation of my Mind,
joined to my Fasting, so overpowered
my Spirits, that when I was taken from
my Horse, I immediately fainted away,
in the Arms of the Man who helped me
from my Saddle. My Aunt express'd
great Astonishment at seeing me in this
Condition, with my Eyes almost swollen
out of my Head with Tears; but my
Father's Letter, which I delivered her
soon after I came to myself, pretty well,
I believed, cured her Surprize. She
often smiled with a Mixture of Contempt
and Anger, while she was reading
it; and having pronounced her
Brother to be a Fool, she turned to me,
and with as much Affability as possible, 

(for she is no great Mistress of Affability)
said, “Don't be uneasy, dear Molly; 
for you are come to the House of a
Friend; of one who hath Sense enough
to discern the Author of all the Mischief; 
depend upon it, Child, I will ere
long make some People ashamed of
their Folly.” This kind Reception
gave me some Comfort, my Aunt assuring
me that she would convince him
how unjustly he had accused me of
having made any Complaints to her. 
A Paper War was now begun between
these two, which not only fixed an irreconcileable
Hatred between them; but
confirmed my Father's Displeasure against
me, and in the End, I believe, did me
no Service with my Aunt: For I was
considered by both as the Cause of their
Dissension; tho' in Fact, my Step-Mother,
who very well knew the Affection
my Aunt had for her, had long
since done her Business with my Father; 
and as for my Aunt's Affection toward
him, it had been abating several Years,
from an Apprehension that he did not
pay sufficient Deference to her Understanding. 

‘I had lived about half a Year with
my Aunt, when I heard of my Step-Mother's
being delivered of a Boy, and
the great Joy my Father expressed on
that Occasion; but, poor Man, he lived
not long to enjoy his Happiness; for
within a Month afterwards I had the
melancholy News of his Death. 
‘Notwithstanding all the Disobligations
I had lately received from him, I was
sincerely afflicted at my Loss of him. 
All his Kindness to me in my Infancy,
all his Kindness to me while I was
growing up, recurred to my Memory,
raised a thousand tender, melancholy
Ideas, and totally obliterated all
Thoughts of his latter Behaviour, for
which I made also every Allowance and
every Excuse in my Power. 
‘But what may perhaps appear more
extraordinary, my Aunt began soon to
speak of him with Concern. She said,
he had some Understanding formerly,
tho' his Passion for that vile Woman
had in a great Measure obscured it; 
and one Day, when she was in an ill
Humour with me, she had the Cruelty 

to throw out a Hint, that she had never
quarrelled with her Brother, if it had
not been on my Account. 
‘My Father during his Life had allowed
my Aunt very handsomely for my
Board; for Generosity was too deeply
rivetted in his Nature to be plucked out
by all the Power of his Wife. So far,
however, she prevailed, that tho' he
died possessed of upwards of 2000l.
he left me no more than 100l. which,
as he expressed in his Will, was to set
me up in some Business, if I had the
Grace to take to any. 
‘Hitherto my Aunt had in general
treated me with some Degree of Affection; 
but her Behaviour began now to
be changed. She soon took an Opportunity
of giving me to understand, that
her Fortune was insufficient to keep me; 
and as I could not live on the Interest
of my own, it was high time for me to
consider about going into the World. 
She added, That her Brother having
mentioned my setting up in some Business,
in his Will, was very foolish; that
I had been bred to nothing; and besides,
that the Sum was too trifling to set me 

up in any Way of Reputation; she desired
me therefore to think of immediately
going into Service. 
‘This Advice was perhaps right enough; 
and I told her I was very ready to do as
she directed me; but I was at that time,
in an ill State of Health, I desired her
therefore to let me stay with her, till
my Legacy, which was not to be paid
till a Year after my Father's Death, was
due; and I then promised to satisfy her
for my Board; to which she readily
consented. 
‘And now, Madam,’ said Mrs. Bennet
sighing, ‘I am going to open to you
those Matters which lead directly to that
great Catastrophe of my Life, which
hath occasioned my giving you this
Trouble, and of trying your Patience
in this Manner. 
Amelia, notwithstanding her Impatience,
made a very civil Answer to this; and
then Mrs. Bennet proceeded to relate what
is written in the next Chapter. 




Further Continuation. 
‘The Curate of the Parish where
my Aunt dwelt was a young Fellow
of about four and twenty. He had
been left an Orphan in his Infancy, and
entirely unprovided for; when an Uncle
had the Goodness to take Care of
his Education, both at School and at
the University. As the young Gentleman
was intended for the Church, his Uncle,
tho' he had two Daughters of his own,
and no very large Fortune, purchased
for him the next Presentation of a Living
of near 200l. a Year. The Incumbent,
at the Time of the Purchase, was
under the Age of Sixty, and in apparent
good Health; notwithstanding which he
died soon after the Bargain, and long
before the Nephew was capable of Orders; 
so that the Uncle was obliged to
give the Living to a Clergyman, to hold
it till the young Man came of proper
Age. 
‘The young Gentleman had not attained
his proper Age of taking Orders, when he
had the Misfortune to lose his Uncle and 

only Friend; who, thinking he had
sufficiently provided for his Nephew
by the Purchase of the Living, considered
him no farther in his Will, but
divided all the Fortune of which he died
possessed, between his two Daughters; 
recommending it to them, however, on
his Death-bed, to assist their Cousin with
Money sufficient to keep him at the
University, till he should be capable of
Ordination. 
‘But as no Appointment of this Kind
was in the Will, the young Ladies,
who received about 2000l. each, thought
proper to disregard the last Words of
their Father: For besides that both of
them were extremely tenacious of their
Money, they were great Enemies to
their Cousin, on Account of their Father's
Kindness to him, and thought
proper to let him know that they thought
he had robbed them of too much already. 
‘The poor young Fellow was now
greatly distrest: For he had yet above
a Year to stay at the University, without
any visible Means of sustaining himself
there. 

‘In this Distress, however, he met
with a Friend, who had the Good-nature
to lend him the Sum of twenty
Pounds, for which he only accepted his
Bond for forty, and which was to be
paid within a Year after his being possessed
of his Living. 
‘With this small Sum thus hardly obtained,
the poor Gentleman made a
Shift to struggle with all Difficulties,
till he became of due Age to take upon
himself the Character of a Deacon. 
He then repaired to that Clergyman,
to whom his Uncle had given the Living
upon the Conditions above-mentioned,
to procure a Title to Ordination; 
but this, to his great Surprize and
Mortification, was absolutely refused
him. 
‘The immediate Disappointment did
not hurt him so much, as the Conclusion
he drew from it: For he could
have but little Hopes, that the Man
who could have the Cruelty to refuse
him a Title, would vouchsafe afterwards
to deliver up to him a Living of
so considerable a Value; nor was it long 

before this worthy Incumbent told
him plainly, that he valued his Uncle's
Favours at too high a Rate to part with
them to any one; nay, he pretended
Scruples of Conscience, and said that if
he had made any slight Promises, which
he did not now well remember, they
were wicked and void; that he looked
upon himself as married to his Parish,
and he could no more give it up, than
he could give up his Wife, without Sin. 
‘The poor young Fellow was now obliged
to seek farther for a Title, which
at length he obtained from the Rector
of the Parish where my Aunt lived. 
‘He had not long been settled in the
Curacy, before an intimate Acquaintance
grew between him and my Aunt: 
For she was a great Admirer of the
Clergy, and used frequently to say they
were the only conversable Creatures in
the Country. 
‘The first Time she was in this Gentleman's
Company was at a Neighbour's
Christning, where she stood God-mother. 
Here she displayed her whole little Stock
of Knowledge, in order to captivate Mr. 

Bennet (I suppose, Madam, you already
guess that to have been his Name)
and before they parted gave him a very
strong Invitation to her House. 
‘Not a Word passed at this Christning
between Mr. Bennet and myself; but
our Eyes were not unemployed. Here,
Madam, I first felt a pleasing Kind of
Confusion, which I know not how to
describe. I felt a Kind of Uneasiness; 
yet did not wish to be without it. I
longed to be alone; yet dreaded the
Hour of Parting. I could not keep my
Eyes off from the Object which caused
my Confusion, and which I was at once
afraid of and enamoured with. –––But
why do I attempt to describe my Situation
to one who must, I am sure, have
felt the same?’ 
Amelia smiled, and Mrs. Bennet went
on thus, ‘O, Mrs. Booth, had you seen
the Person of whom I am now speaking,
you would not condemn the Suddenness
of my Love. Nay, indeed, I had seen
him there before, tho' this was the first
Time I had ever heard the Music of his
Voice. –––O! it was the sweetest that was
ever heard. 

‘Mr. Bennet came to visit my Aunt
the very next Day. She imputed this
respectful Haste to the powerful Charms
of her Understanding, and resolved to
lose no Opportunity in improving the
Opinion which she imagined he had
conceived of her. She became by this
Desire quite ridiculous, and ran into
Absurdities and a Gallimatia scarce credible. 
‘Mr. Bennet, as I afterwards found, saw
her in the same Light with myself; but
as he was a very sensible and well-bred
Man, he so well concealed his Opinion
from us both, that I was almost angry,
and she was pleased even to Raptures,
declaring herself charmed with his Understanding; 
tho' indeed he had said
very little; but I believe he heard himself
into her good Opinion, while he
gazed himself into Love. 
‘The two first Visits which Mr. Bennet
made to my Aunt, tho' I was in
the Room all the Time, I never spoke
a Word; but on the third, on some Argument
which arose between them, Mr.
Bennet referred himself to me. I took 

his Side of the Question, as indeed I
must to have done Justice, and repeated
two or three Words of Latin. My
Aunt reddened at this, and exprest great
Disdain of my Opinion, declaring she
was astonished that a Man of Mr. Bennet's
Understanding could appeal to
the Judgment of a silly Girl: Is she,
said my Aunt bridling herself, fit to decide
between us? Mr. Bennet spoke
very favourably of what I had said; 
upon which my Aunt burst almost into
a Rage, treated me with downright
Scurrility, called me conceited Fool,
abused my poor Father for having
taught me Latin, which, she said, had
made me a downright Coxcomb, and
made me prefer myself to those who
were a hundred Times my Superiors in
Knowledge. She then fell foul on the
learned Languages, declared they were
totally useless, and concluded that she
had read all that was worth reading,
tho' she thanked Heaven she understood
no Language but her own. 
‘Before the End of his Visit, Mr.
Bennet reconciled himself very well to
my Aunt, which, indeed, was no difficult
Task for him to accomplish; but 

from that Hour she conceived a Hatred
and Rancour towards me, which I could
never appease. 
‘My Aunt had, from my first Coming
into her House, expressed great Dislike
to my Learning. In plain Truth, she
envied me that Advantage. This Envy
I had long ago discovered; and had
taken great Pains to smother it, carefully
avoiding ever to mention a Latin
Word in her Presence, and always submitting
to her Authority; for indeed I
despised her Ignorance too much to dispute
with her. By these Means I had
pretty well succeeded, and we lived tolerably
together. But the Affront paid
to her Understanding by Mr. Bennet in
my Favour was an Injury never to be
forgiven to me. She took me severely
to Task that very Evening, and reminded
me of going to Service, in such
earnest Terms, as almost amounted to
literally turning me out of Doors; advising
me, in the most insulting Manner,
to keep my Latin to myself; which,
she said, was useless to any one; but
ridiculous, when pretended to by a Servant. 

‘The next Visit Mr. Bennet made at
our House, I was not suffered to be present
at. This was much the shortest of
all his Visits; and when he went away,
he left my Aunt in a worse Humour
than ever I had seen her. The Whole
was discharged on me in the usual
Manner, by upbraiding me with my
Learning, Conceit, and Poverty; reminding
me of Obligations, and insisting
on my going immediately to Service. 
With all this I was greatly pleased, as it
assured me, that Mr. Bennet had said
something to her in my Favour; and I
would have purchased a kind Expression
of his at almost any Price. 
‘I should scarce, however, have been
so sanguine as to draw this Conclusion,
had I not received some Hints, that I
had not unhappily placed my Affections
on a Man who made me no Return: 
For tho' he had scarce addressed a dozen
Sentences to me (for, indeed, he had
no Opportunity) yet his Eyes had revealed
certain Secrets to mine, with
which I was not displeased. 

‘I remained, however, in a State of
Anxiety near a Month; sometimes
pleasing myself, with thinking Mr. Bennet's
Heart was in the same Situation
with my own; sometimes doubting that
my Wishes had flattered and deceived
me; and not in the least questioning
that my Aunt was my Rival: For I
thought no Woman could be Proof against
the Charms that had subdued me. 
Indeed, Mrs. Booth, he was a charming
young Fellow; I must, I must pay this
Tribute to his Memory–––O, gracious
Heaven! why, why did I ever see him!
why was I doom'd to such Misery!’ ––– 
Here she burst into a Flood of Tears, and
remained incapable of Speech for some
Time; during which, the gentle Amelia
endeavoured all she could to soothe her; 
and gave sufficient Marks of sympathizing
in the tender Affliction of her Friend. 
Mrs. Bennet, at length, recovered her
Spirits, and proceeded, as in the next
Chapter. 




The Story of Mrs. Bennet continued. 
‘I scarce know where I left off––– 
Oh! I was, I think, telling you,
that I esteemed my Aunt as my Rival; 
and it is not easy to conceive a greater
Degree of Detestation than I had for
her; and what may, perhaps, appear
strange, as she daily grew more and
more civil to me, my Hatred encreased
with her Civility: For I imputed it all
to her Triumph over me, and to her
having secured the Heart I longed for
beyond all Apprehension. 
‘How was I surprised, when one Day,
with as much good Humour as she was
Mistress of, (for her Countenance was
not very pleasing) she asked me, how I
liked Mr. Bennet? The Question, you
will believe, Madam, threw me into
great Confusion; which she plainly perceived,
and without waiting for my
Answer, told me, she was very well
satisfied; for that it did not require her
Discernment to read my Thoughts in
my Countenance.’ “Well, Child,” 

‘said she,’ “I have suspected this a great
while, and I believe it will please you
to know, that I Yesterday made the
same Discovery in your Lover.” ‘This,
I confess to you, was more than I could
well bear, and I begged her to say no
more to me at that Time, on that Subject.’ 
–––“Nay, Child,” ‘answered she,’ 
“I must tell you all, or I should not act
a friendly Part. Mr. Bennet, I am
convinced, hath a Passion for you; but
it is a Passion which I think you should
not encourage. For, to be plain with
you, I fear he is in Love with your
Person only. Now this is a Love, Child,
which cannot produce that rational
Happiness, which a Woman of Sense
ought to expect.” –––In short, she ran
on with a great Deal of Stuff about rational
Happiness, and Women of Sense,
and concluded, with assuring me, that
after the strictest Scrutiny, she could
not find that Mr. Bennet had an adequate
Opinion of my Understanding; upon
which she vouchsafed to make me many
Compliments, but mixed with several
Sarcasms concerning my Learning. 
‘I hope, Madam, however,’ said she to
Amelia, ‘you have not so bad an Opinion of 

my Capacity, as to imagine me dull
enough to be offended with Mr. Bennet's
Sentiments; for which I presently knew
so well to account. I was, indeed, charmed
with his Ingenuity, who had discovered,
perhaps, the only Way of reconciling my
Aunt to those Inclinations, which I now
assured myself he had for me. 
‘I was not long left to support my Hopes
by my Sagacity. He soon found an Opportunity
of declaring his Passion. He
did this in so forcible, tho' gentle, a
Manner, with such a Profusion of Fervency
and Tenderness at once, that his
Love, like a Torrent, bore every Thing
before it; and I am almost ashamed to
own to you, how very soon he prevailed
upon me to––to––in short, to be an honest
Woman, and to confess to him the
plain Truth. 
‘When we were upon a good Footing
together, he gave me a long Relation of
what had past, at several Interviews
with my Aunt, at which I had not been
present. He said, he had discovered,
that as she valued herself chiefly on her
Understanding, so she was extremely
jealous of mine, and hated me on Account 

of my Learning. That as he had
loved me passionately from his first seeing
me, and had thought of Nothing,
from that Time, but of throwing himself
at my Feet, he saw no Way so open to
propitiate my Aunt as that which he had
taken; by commending my Beauty, a
Perfection to which she had long resigned
all Claim, at the Expence of my Understanding,
in which he lamented my
Deficiency to a Degree almost of Ridicule. 
This he imputed chiefly to my
Learning; on this Occasion he advanced
a Sentiment, which so pleased my
Aunt, that she thought proper to make
it her own: For I heard it afterwards
more than once from her own Mouth. 
Learning, he said, had the same Effect
on the Mind, that strong Liquors have
on the Constitution; both tending to
eradicate all our natural Fire and Energy. 
His Flattery had made such a
Dupe of my Aunt, that she assented,
without the least Suspicion of his Sincerity,
to all he said; so sure is Vanity
to weaken every Fortress of the Understanding,
and to betray us to every Attack
of the Enemy. 

‘You will believe, Madam, that I readily
forgave him all he had said, not only
from that Motive which I have mentioned,
but as I was assured he had spoke the
Reverse of his real Sentiments. I was
not, however, quite so well pleased with
my Aunt, who began to treat me as if I was
really an Ideot. Her Contempt, I own, a
little piqued me; and I could not help
often expressing my Resentment, when
we were alone together, to Mr. Bennet; 
who never failed to gratify me, by making
her Conceit the Subject of his Wit; 
a Talent which he possessed in the most
extraordinary Degree. 
‘This proved of very fatal Consequence: 
For one Day, while we were
enjoying my Aunt in a very thick Arbour
in the Garden, she stole upon us
unobserved, and overheard our whole
Conversation. I wish, my Dear, you
understood Latin, that I might repeat
you a Sentence, in which the Rage of a
Tigress, that hath lost her young, is
described. No English Poet, as I remember,
hath come up to it; nor am I
myself equal to the Undertaking. She
burst in upon us, open-mouthed, and 

after discharging every abusive Word
almost, in the only Language she understood,
on poor Mr. Bennet, turned
us both out of Doors; declaring, she
would send my Rags after me, but
would never more permit me to set my
Foot within her Threshold. 
‘Consider, dear Madam, to what a
wretched Condition we were now reduced. 
I had not yet received the
small Legacy left me by my Father; 
nor was Mr. Bennet Master of five
Pounds in the whole World. 
‘In this Situation, the Man I doated
on to Distraction had but little Difficulty
to persuade me to a Proposal, which,
indeed, I thought generous in him to
make; as it seemed to proceed from that
Tenderness for my Reputation, to which
he ascribed it; indeed, it could proceed
from no Motive with which I should
have been displeased. –––In a Word, within
two Days we were Man and Wife. 
‘Mr. Bennet now declared himself the
happiest of Men; and for my Part, I sincerely
declare, I envied no Woman upon
Earth. –––How little, alas! did I 

then know, or suspect the Price I was
to pay for all my Joys. –––A Match of
real Love is, indeed, truly Paradise; 
and such perfect Happiness seems to be
the forbidden Fruit to Mortals, which
we are to lament having tasted, during
the rest of our Lives. 
‘The first Uneasiness which attacked
us after our Marriage was on my Aunt's
Account. It was very disagreeable to
live under the Nose of so near a Relation,
who did not acknowledge us; but,
on the contrary, was ever doing us
all the ill Turns in her Power; and
making a Party against us in the Parish,
which is always easy enough to do amongst
the Vulgar, against Persons who
are their Superiors in Rank, and, at the
same Time, their Inferiors in Fortune. 
This made Mr. Bennet think of procuring
an Exchange, in which Intention
he was soon after confirmed by the Arrival
of the Rector. It was the Rector's
Custom to spend three Months
every Year at his Living; for which
Purpose he reserved an Apartment in
his Parsonage-House, which was full
large enough for two such little Families
as then occupied it: We, at first, promised 

ourselves some little Convenience
from his boarding with us; and Mr.
Bennet began to lay aside his Thoughts
of leaving his Curacy, at least for some
Time. But these golden Ideas presently
vanished: For tho' we both used our
utmost Endeavours to please him, we
soon found the Impossibility of succeeding. 
He was, indeed, to give you his
Character in a Word, the most peevish
of Mortals. This Temper, notwithstanding
that he was both a good and a
pious Man, made his Company so insufferable,
that nothing could compensate
it. If his Breakfast was not ready
to a Moment, if a Dish of Meat was
too much or too little done; in short, if
any thing failed of exactly hitting his
Taste, he was sure to be out of Humour
all that Day; so that, indeed, he was
scarce ever in a good Temper a whole
Day together: For Fortune seems to
take a Delight in thwarting this Kind of
Disposition, to which Human Life, with
its many Crosses and Accidents, is in
Truth by no Means fitted. 
‘Mr. Bennet was now, by my Desire,
as well as his own, determined to quit
the Parish; but when he attempted to 

get an Exchange, he found it a Matter
of more Difficulty than he had apprehended: 
For the Rector's Temper was
so well known among the neighbouring
Clergy, that none of them could be
brought to think of spending three
Months in a Year with him. 
‘After many fruitless Enquiries, Mr.
Bennet was at last informed of an Office
lately erected, opposite Cecil-street in the
Strand, called the Universal Register, where
he was assured he might probably have his
Choice of above a hundred Curacies, in
different Parts of the Kingdom. This
greatly pleased him; and he resolved,
without more Delay, to take his Leave of
the Rector; which he did in the most
friendly Manner possible, and preached
his farewel Sermon; nor was except among
the few whom my Aunt, who remained
still inexorable, had prevailed upon to
hate us without any Cause. 
‘To London we came, and took
up our Lodging the first Night at the
Inn where the Stage Coach set us
down; the next Morning my Husband
went early to the Office, from whence 

he returned in a Kind of Rapture, saying,
he had been at a Place where all
the Necessities of Life were provided for. 
I have not only heard, said he, of Variety
of Curacies; but I have equipped
myself with a Lodging in the Neighbourhood
of a worthy Peer, who was
my Fellow Collegiate; and what is more,
I have a Direction from the Office to a
Person who will advance your Legacy
at a very reasonable Rate. 
‘This last Particular was extremely
agreeable to me; for our last Guinea
was now broached; and the Rector had
lent my Husband ten Pounds to pay his
Debts in the Country: For with all his
Peevishness he was a good and a generous
Man, and had indeed so many valuable
Qualities, that I lamented his
Temper, after I knew him thoroughly,
as much on his Account, as on my
own. 
‘We now quitted the Inn, and went
to our Lodgings, where my Husband
having placed me in Safety, as he said,
he went about the Business of the Legacy,
with good Assurance of Success: 
There being, as he told me, near fifty 

Gentlemen, whose Names were registered
in the Office, who transacted Business
of this Kind. 
‘My Husband returned elated with his
Success, the second Person to whom he
applied having undertaken to advance
the Legacy, which he fulfilled as soon
as the proper Enquiries could be made,
and proper Instruments prepared for
that Purpose. 
‘This, however, took up so much
Time, that as our Fund was so very
low, we were reduced to some Distress,
and obliged to live extremely penurious; 
nor would all do, without my taking a
most disagreeable Way of procuring
Money, by pawning one of my Gowns. 
‘Mr. Bennet was now settled in a Curacy
in Town, greatly to his Satisfaction; 
and our Affairs seemed to have a
prosperous Aspect, when he came home
to me one Morning in much apparent
Disorder, looking as pale as Death, and
begged me by some Means or other to
get him a Dram; for that he was taken
with a sudden Faintness and Lowness of
Spirits. 

‘Frighted as I was, I immediately ran
down Stairs, and procured fome Rum
of the Mistress of the House; the first
Time indeed I ever knew him drink
any. When he came to himself, he begged
me not to be alarmed; for it was
no Distemper, but something that had
vexed him, which had caused his Disorder,
which he had now perfectly recovered. 
‘He then told me the whole Affair. 
He had hitherto deferred paying a Visit
to the Lord whom I mentioned to have
been formerly his Fellow Collegiate,
and was now his Neighbour, 'till he
could put himself in decent Rigging. 
He had now purchased a new Cassock,
Hat and Wig, and went to pay his Respects
to his old Acquaintance, who had
received from him many Civilities and
Assistances in his Learning at the University,
and had promised to return them
fourfold hereafter. 
‘It was not without some Difficulty
that Mr. Bennet got into the Antichamber. 
Here he waited, or, as the Phrase
is, cooled his Heels for above an Hour, 

before he saw his Lordship; nor had he
seen him then, but by an Accident: 
For my Lord was going out, when he
casually intercepted him in his Passage
to his Chariot. He approached to Salutation
with some Familiarity, tho'
with Respect, depending on his former
Intimacy, when my Lord stepping short
very gravely told him, he had not the
Pleasure of knowing him. How! my
Lord, said he, can you have so soon
forgot your old Acquaintance Tom Bennet? 
O Mr. Bennet, cries his Lordship,
with much Reserve, is it you? You
will pardon my Memory. I am glad
to see you, Mr. Bennet; but you must
excuse me at present: For I am in very
great Haste. He then broke from him,
and without more Ceremony, or any further
Invitation, went directly into his
Chariot. 
‘This cold Reception from a Person
for whom my Husband had a real
Friendship, and from whom he had
great Reason to expect a very warm
Return of Affection, so affected the
poor Man, that it caused all those Symptoms
which I have mentioned before. 

‘Tho' this Incident produced no material
Consequence, I could not pass it
over in Silence, as of all the Misfortunes
which ever befel him, it affected my
Husband the most. I need not, however,
to a Woman of your Delicacy, make
any Comments on a Behaviour, which,
tho' I believe it is very common, is nevertheless
cruel and base beyond Description,
and is diametrically opposite to
true Honour, as well as to Goodness. 
‘To relieve the Uneasiness which my
Husband felt on Account of his false
Friend, I prevailed with him to go
every Night, almost for a Fortnight together,
to the Play; a Diversion of
which he was greatly fond, and from
which he did not think his being a
Clergyman excluded him; indeed, it is
very well if those austere Persons who
would be inclined to censure him on
this Head, have themselves no greater
Sins to answer for. 
‘From this Time during three Months,
we past our Time very agreeably, a
little too agreeably perhaps for our Circumstances: 
For however innocent Diversions 

may be in other Respects, they
must be owned to be expensive. When
you consider then, Madam, that our
Income from the Curacy was less than
Forty Pounds a Year, and that after
Payment of the Debt to the Rector, and
another to my Aunt, with the Costs in
Law which she had occasioned by suing
for it, my Legacy was reduced to less
than Seventy Pounds, you will not wonder
that in Diversions, Cloaths, and
the common Expences of Life, we had
almost consumed our whole Stock. 
‘The inconsiderate Manner in which
we had lived for some Time will, I
doubt not, appear to you to want some
Excuse; but I have none to make for it. 
Two Things, however, now happened
which occasioned much serious Reflexion
to Mr. Bennet; the one was, that
I grew near my Time; the other, that
he now received a Letter from Oxford
demanding the Debt of Forty Pounds,
which I mentioned to you before. The
former of these he made a Pretence of
obtaining a Delay for the Payment of the
latter, promising in two Months to pay
off half the Debt, by which Means he obtained
a Forbearance during that Time. 

‘I was now delivered of a Son, a
Matter which should in Reality have
encreased our Concern; but on the contrary
it gave us great Pleasure; greater
indeed could not have been conceived
at the Birth of an Heir to the most
plentiful Estate. So entirely thoughtless
were we, and so little Forecast had we
of those many Evils and Distresses to
which we had rendered a Human Creature,
and one so dear to us, liable. The
Day of a Christening is in all Families,
I believe, a Day of Jubilee and Rejoicing; 
and yet, if we consider the Interest
of that little Wretch, who is the Occasion
of all this Joy, how very little
Reason would the most sanguine Persons
have for rejoicing on this Occasion. 
‘But tho' our Eyes were too weak to
look forward, for the Sake of our Child,
we could not be blinded to those Dangers
that immediately threatned ourselves. 
Mr. Bennet, at the Expiration of the
two Months, received a second Letter
from Oxford, in a very peremptory Stile,
and threatning a Suit without any farther
Delay. This alarmed us in the
strongest Manner; and my Husband; to 

secure his Liberty, was advised for a
while to shelter himself in the Verge
of the Court. 
‘And now, Madam, I am entring on
that Scene which directly leads to all
my Misery.’ —Here she stopped, and
wiped her Eyes,–––and then begging
Amelia to excuse her for a few Minutes
ran hastily out of the Room, leaving
Amelia by herself, while she refreshed
her Spirits with a Cordial to enable her
to relate what follows in the next
Chapter. 



Farther Continued. 
Mrs. Bennet returning into the Room,
made a short Apology for her Abscence,
and then proceeded in these
Words. 
‘We now left our Lodging, and took
a second Floor in that very House where
you now are; to which we were recommended
by the Woman where we had
before lodged: For the Mistresses of both
Houses were acquainted; and, indeed,
we had been all at the Play together. To
this new Lodging then, (such was our 

wretched Destiny) we immediately repaired,
and were received by Mrs.
Ellison (how can I bear the Sound of
that detested Name!) with much Civility; 
she took care, however, during
the first Fortnight of our Residence,
to wait upon us every Monday Morning
for her Rent: Such being it seems the
Custom of this Place, which being inhabited
chiefly by Persons in Debt, is
not the Region of Credit. 
‘My Husband, by the singular Goodness
of the Rector, who greatly compassionated
his Case, was enabled to
continue in his Curacy, tho' he could
only do the Duty on Sundays. He was,
however, sometimes obliged to furnish
a Person to officiate at his Expence; 
so that our Income was very scanty,
and the poor little Remainder of the
Legacy being almost spent, we were
reduced to some Difficulties, and what
was worse, saw still a Prospect of greater
before our Eyes. 
‘Under these Circumstances, how
agreeable to poor Mr. Bennet must have
been the Behaviour of Mrs. Ellison, who,
when he carried her her Rent on the
usual Day, told him, with a benevolent 

Smile, that he needed not to give himself
the Trouble of such exact Punctuality. 
She added, that, if it was at any
time inconvenient to him, he might pay
her when he pleased. To say the Truth,
says she, I never was so much pleased with
any Lodgers in my Life,–––I am convinced,
Mr. Bennet, you are a very worthy Man,
and you are a very happy one too; for you
have the prettiest Wife and the prettiest
Child I ever saw. –––These, dear Madam,
were the Words she was pleased to make
use of; and I am sure she behaved to
me with such an Appearance of Friendship
and Affection, that, as I could not
perceive any possible Views of Interest
which she could have in her Professions,
I easily believed them real. 
‘There lodged in the same House,
O Mrs. Booth! the Blood runs cold to
my Heart, and should run cold to yours
when I name him: –––There lodged in
the same House a Lord–––The Lord indeed
whom I have since seen in your
Company. This Lord, Mrs. Ellison
told me, had taken a great Fancy to
my little Charly: Fool that I was, and
blinded by my own Passion, which made
me conceive that an Infant, not three 

Months old, could be really the Object
of Affection to any besides a Parent; 
and more especially to a gay young
Fellow! But if I was silly in being deceived,
how wicked was the Wretch
who deceived me; who used such Art,
and employed such Pains, such incredible
Pains to deceive me! He acted
the Part of a Nurse to my little Infant; 
he danced it, he lulled it, he kissed it; 
declared it was the very Picture of a
Nephew of his, his favourite Sister's
Child; and said so many kind and fond
Things of its Beauty, that I myself,
tho', I believe, one of the tenderest and
fondest of Mothers, scarce carried my
own Ideas of my little Darling's Perfection,
beyond the Compliments which
he paid it. 
‘My Lord, however, perhaps from
Modesty before my Face, fell far short
of what Mrs. Ellison reported from
him. And now, when she found the
Impression which was made on me by
these Means, she took every Opportunity
of insinuating to me his Lordship's
many Virtues, his great Goodness to
his Sister's Children in particular; nor 

did she fail to drop some Hints, which
gave me the most simple and groundless
Hopes of strange Consequences from
his Fondness to my Charly. 
‘When by these Means, which, simple
as they may appear, were, perhaps,
the most artful, my Lord had gained
something more, I think, than my Esteem,
he took the surest Method to
confirm himself in my Affection. This
was, by professing the highest Friendship
for my Husband: For, as to myself,
I do assure you, he never shewed
me more than common Respect; and I
hope you will believe, I should have
immediately startled and flown off if
he had. Poor I accounted for all the
Friendship which he expressed for my
Husband, and all the Fondness which
he shewed to my Boy, from the great
Prettiness of the one, and the great
Merit of the other; foolishly conceiving,
that others saw with my Eyes,
and felt with my Heart. Little did I
dream, that my own unfortunate Person
was the Fountain of all this Lord's
Goodness, and was the intended Price
of it. 

‘One Evening, as I was drinking Tea
with Mrs. Ellison by my Lord's Fire,
(a Liberty which she never scrupled taking
when he was gone out) my little
Charly, now about half a Year old,
sitting in her Lap; my Lord, accidentally
no Doubt; indeed, I then thought
it so, came in. I was confounded and
offered to go; but my Lord declared,
if he disturbed Mrs. Ellison's Company,
as he phrased it, he would himself
leave the Room. When I was
thus prevailed on to keep my Seat, my
Lord immediately took my little Baby
into his Lap, and gave it some Tea
there, not a little at the Expence of his
Embroidery: For he was very richly
drest; indeed, he was a fine a Figure as,
perhaps, ever was seen. His Behaviour
on this Occasion gave me many Ideas
in his Favour. I thought he discovered
good Sense, Good-nature, Condescension,
and other good Qualities, by the
Fondness he shewed to my Child, and
the Contempt he seemed to express for
his Finery, which so greatly became
him: For I cannot deny, but that he
was the handsomest and genteelest Person
in the World; tho' such Considerations 

advanced him not a Step in my Favour. 
‘My Husband now returned from
Church, (for this happened on a Sunday)
and was, by my Lord's particular Desire,
ushered into the Room. My Lord
received him with the utmost Politeness,
and with many Professions of
Esteem; which, he said, he had conceived
from Mrs. Ellison's Representations
of his Merit. He then proceeded
to mention the Living, which was detained
from my Husband, of which
Mrs. Ellison had likewise informed him; 
and said, he thought it would be no
difficult Matter, to obtain a Restoration
of it by the Authority of the Bishop,
who was his particular Friend, and to
whom he would take an immediate Opportunity
of mentioning it. This, at
last, he determined to do the very next
Day; when he invited us both to Dinner,
where we were to be acquainted
with his Lordship's Success. 
My Lord now insisted on my Husband's
staying Supper with him, without
taking any Notice of me; but Mrs.
Ellison declared, he should not part 

Man and Wife; and that she herself
would stay with me. The Motion was
too agreeable to me to be rejected; and,
except the little Time I retired to put
my Child to Bed, we spent together the
most agreeable Evening imaginable; 
nor was it, I believe, easy to decide,
whether Mr. Bennet or myself were most
delighted with his Lordship and Mrs.
Ellison; but this I assure you, the Generosity
of the one, and the extreme Civility
and Kindness of the other were
the Subjects of our Conversation all
the ensuing Night, during which we
neither of us closed our Eyes. 
‘The next Day, at Dinner, my Lord
acquainted us, that he had prevailed
with the Bishop to write to the Clergyman
in the Country; indeed, he told
us, that he had engaged the Bishop to be
very warm in our Interest, and had not
the least Doubt of Success. This threw
us both into a Flow of Spirits; and in
the Afternoon, Mr. Bennet, at Mrs.
Ellison's Request, which was seconded
by his Lordship, related the History of
our Lives, from our first Acquaintance. 
My Lord seemed much affected with
some tender Scenes, which, as no Man 

could better feel, so none could better
describe than my Husband. When he
had finished, my Lord begged Pardon
for mentioning an Occurrence which
gave him such a particular Concern, as
it had disturbed that delicious State of
Happiness in which we had lived at our
former Lodging. “It would be ungenerous,” 
said he, “to rejoice at an
Accident, which, tho' it brought me
fortunately acquainted with two of the
most agreeable People in the World,
was yet at the Expence of your mutual
Felicity. The Circumstance I mean is
your Debt at Oxford; pray how doth
that stand? I am resolved it shall never
disturb your Happiness hereafter.” 
At these Words, the Tears burst from
my poor Husband's Eyes; and in an
Ecstasy of Gratitude, he cried out,
“Your Lordship overcomes me with Generosity. 
If you go on in this Manner,
both my Wise's Gratitude and mine
must be bankrupt.” He then acquainted
my Lord with the exact State
of the Case, and received Assurances
from him, that the Debt should never
trouble him. My Husband was again
breaking out into the warmest Expressions
of Gratitude; but my Lord stopt 

him short; saying, if you have any
Obligation, it is to my little Charly here,
from whose little innocent Smiles I have
received more than the Value of this
trifling Debt in Pleasure. I forgot to
tell you, that when I offered to leave
the Room after Dinner, upon my Child's
Account, my Lord would not suffer
me; but ordered the Child to be brought
to me. He now took it out of my
Arms, placed it upon his own Knee,
and fed it with some Fruit from the
Dessert. In short, it would be more
tedious to you than to myself, to relate
the thousand little Tendernesses he shewed
to the Child. He gave it many
Baubles; amongst the rest was a Coral,
worth, at least, three Pounds; and
when my Husband was confined near
a Fortnight to his Chamber with a Cold,
he visited the Child every Day; (for to
this Infant's Account were all the Visits
placed) and seldom failed of accompanying
his Visit with a Present to the
little Thing. 
‘Here, Mrs. Booth, I cannot help
mentioning a Doubt which hath often
arisen in my Mind, since I have been
enough Mistress of myself to reflect on 

this horrid Train, which was laid to
blow up my Innocence. Wicked and
barbarous it was to the highest Degree,
without any Question; but my Doubt
is, whether the Art or Folly of it be
the more conspicuous: For however
delicate and refined the Art must be allowed
to have been, the Folly, I think,
must, upon a fair Examination, appear
no less astonishing: For to lay all Considerations
of Cruelty and Crime out of
the Case, what a foolish Bargain doth
the Man make for himself, who purchases
so poor a Pleasure at so high a
Price! 
‘We had lived near three Weeks,
with as much Freedom as if we had been
all of the same Family; when one Afternoon,
my Lord proposed to my
Husband to ride down himself to solicite
the Surrender: For he said, the
Bishop had received an unsatisfactory
Answer from the Parson, and had writ
a second Letter more pressing; which
his Lordship now promised us to strengthen
by one of his own that my Husband
was to carry with him. Mr. Bennet agreed
to this Proposal with great Thankfulness; 
and the next Day was appointed for his 

Journey. The Distance was near seventy
Miles; and a Post-chaise seemed the
pleasantest, as well as most expeditious
Method; but my Husband objected to
the Expence: Upon this, I recollected
that I had seen something about this Matter
in the Plan of the Register-Office. 
By my Advice, therefore, he repaired
thither; where he found a Companion
registered to go within a few Miles of
the same Place; and, by the best of
Luck, this Companion was his old Acquaintance
and Fellow-Collegiate. 
‘My Husband set out on his Journey; 
and he had scarce left me before Mrs.
Ellison came into my Room, and endeavoured
to comfort me in his Absence; 
to say the Truth, tho' he was to be from
me but a few Days, and the Purpose of
his going was to fix our Happiness on a
sound Foundation for all our future
Days, I could scarce support my Spirits
under this first Separation. But tho' I
then thought Mrs. Ellison's Intentions to
be most kind and friendly; yet the Means
she used were utterly ineffectual, and appeared
to me injudicious. Instead of
soothing my Uneasiness, which is always
the first Physic to be given to Grief, she 

rallied me upon it, and began to talk in
a very unusual Stile of Gaiety, in which
she treated conjugal Love with much
Ridicule. 
‘I gave her to understand, that she
displeased me by this Discourse; but
she soon found Means to give such a
Turn to it, as made a Merit of all she
had said. And now, when she had
worked me into a good Humour, she
made a Proposal to me, which I at first
rejected; but at last fatally,–––too fatally
suffered myself to be over-persuaded. 
This was to go to a Masquerade at Ranelagh,
for which my Lord had furnished
her with Tickets. 
At these Words Amelia turned pale as
Death, and hastily begged her Friend to
give her a Glass of Water, some Air, or
any Thing. Mrs. Bennet having thrown
open the Window, and procured the Water,
which prevented Amelia from fainting,
looked at her with much Tenderness, and
cried, ‘I do not wonder, my dear Madam,
that you are affected with my
mentioning that fatal Masquerade; since
I firmly believe the same Ruin was intended
for you at the same Place. The 

Apprehension of which occasioned the
Letter I sent you this Morning, and all
the Trial of your Patience which I have
made since. 
Amelia gave her a tender Embrace, with
many Expressions of the warmest Gratitude; 
assured her, she had pretty well recovered
her Spirits, and begged her to
continue her Story; which Mrs. Bennet
then did. However, as our Readers may
likewise be glad to recover their Spirits
also, we shall here put an End to this
Chapter. 



The Story farther continued. 
Mrs. Bennet proceeded thus. 
‘I was at length, prevailed on to
accompany Mrs. Ellison to the Masquerade. 
Here, I must confess, the
Pleasantness of the Place, the Variety of
the Dresses, and the Novelty of the
Thing gave me much Delight, and
raised my Fancy to the highest Pitch. 
As I was entirely void of all Suspicion,
my Mind threw off all Reserve, and 

Pleasure only filled my Thoughts. Innocence,
it is true, possessed my Heart; 
but it was Innocence unguarded, intoxicated
with foolish Desires, and liable to
every Temptation. During the first
two Hours, we had many trifling Adventures,
not worth remembering. At
length my Lord joined us, and continued
with me all the Evening; 
and we danced several Dances together. 
‘I need not, I believe, tell you, Madam,
how engaging his Conversation
is. I wish I could with Truth say, I
was not pleased with it; or, at least, that
I had a Right to be pleased with it. But
I will disguise Nothing from you: I
now began to discover, that he had
some Affection for me; but he had already
too firm a Footing in my Esteem,
to make the Discovery shocking. I
will–––I will own the Truth; I was delighted
with perceiving a Passion in him,
which I was not unwilling to think he
had had from the Beginning, and to
derive his having concealed it so long,
from his Awe of my Virtue, and his
Respect to my Understanding. I assure
you, Madam, at the same Time, my 

Intentions were never to exceed the
Bounds of Innocence. I was charmed
with the Delicacy of his Passion; and
in the foolish, thoughtless Turn of
Mind, in which I then was, I fancied I
might give some very distant Encouragement
to such a Passion in such a
Man, with the utmost Safety; that I
might indulge my Vanity and Interest
at once, without being guilty of the
least Injury. 
‘I know Mrs. Booth will condemn all
these Thoughts, and I condemn them
no less myself; for it is now my stedfast
Opinion, that the Woman who gives up
the least Out-work of her Virtue, doth,
in that very Moment, betray the Citadel. 
‘About two o' Clock we returned
home, and found a very handsome Colation
provided for us. I was asked to
partake of it; and I did not, I could
not refuse. I was not, however, entirely
void of all Suspicion, and I made many
Resolutions; one of which was, not to
drink a Drop more than my usual Stint. 
This was, at the utmost, little more
than Half a Pint of Small Punch. 

‘I adhered strictly to my Quantity; 
but in the Quality, I am convinced, I
was deceived: For, before I left the
Room, I found my Head giddy. What
the Villain gave me, I know not; but
besides being intoxicated, I perceived
Effects from it, which are not to be described. 
‘Here, Madam, I must draw a Curtain
over the Residue of that fatal
Night. Let it suffice, that it involved
me in the most dreadful Ruin; a
Ruin, to which, I can truly say, I never
consented; and of which I was
scarce conscious, when the villanous
Man avowed it to my Face in the Morning. 
‘Thus I have deduced my Story to the
most horrid Period; happy had I been,
had this been the Period of my Life; 
but I was reserved for greater Miseries: 
But before I enter on them, I will mention
something very remarkable, with
which I was now acquainted, and that
will shew there was Nothing of Accident
which had befallen me; but that all 

was the Effect of a long, regular, premeditated
Design. 
‘You may remember, Madam, I told
you, that we were recommended to
Mrs. Ellison by the Woman at whose
House we had before lodged. This
Woman, it seems, was one of my Lord's
Pimps, and had before introduced me
to his Lordship's Notice. 
‘You are to know then, Madam, that
this Villain, this Lord, now confest to
me, that he had first seen me in the
Galery at the Oratorio; whither I had
gone with Tickets, with which the Woman
where I first lodged, had presented
me, and which were, it seems, purchased
by my Lord. Here I first met
the vile Betrayer, who was disguised in
a Rug-coat, and a Patch upon his
Face.’ 
At these Words, Amelia cried, O gracious
Heavens! and fell back in her Chair. 
Mrs. Bennet, with proper Applications,
brought her back to Life; and then Amelia
acquainted her, that she herself had
first seen the same Person, in the same 

Place, and in the same Disguise. ‘O!
Mrs. Bennet, cried she, how am I indebted
to you! What Words, what
Thanks, what Actions can demonstrate
the Gratitude of my Sentiments! 
I look upon you, and always shall look
upon you, as my Preserver from the
Brink of a Precipice; from which I
was falling into the same Ruin, which
you have so generously, so kindly, and
so nobly disclosed for my Sake.’ 
Here the two Ladies compared Notes; 
and it appeared, that his Lordship's Behaviour
at the Oratorio had been alike
to both: That he had made Use of the
very same Words, the very same Actions
to Amelia, which he had practised over
before on poor unfortunate Mrs. Bennet. 
It may, perhaps, be thought strange, that
neither of them could afterwards recollect
him; but so it was. And, indeed, if we
consider the Force of Disguise, the very
short Time that either of them was with
him at this first Interview, and the very
little Curiosity that must have been supposed
in the Minds of the Ladies, together
with the Amusement in which they
were then engaged, all Wonder will, 

I apprehend, cease. Amelia, however,
now declared, she remembered his Voice
and Features perfectly well; and was
thoroughly satisfied he was the same Person. 
She then accounted for his not having
visited in the Afternoon, according
to his Promise, from her declared Resolutions
to Mrs. Ellison not to see him. She
now burst forth into some very satirical
Invectives against that Lady, and declared
she had the Art, as well as the Wickedness,
of the Devil himself. 
Many Congratulations now past from
Mrs. Bennet to Amelia, which were returned
with the most hearty Acknowledgments
from that Lady. But, instead of
filling our Paper with these, we shall pursue
Mrs. Bennet's Story; which she resumed,
as we have written in the next
Chapter. 



Further Continuation. 
‘No sooner,’ said Mrs. Bennet, continuing
her Story, ‘was my Lord
departed, than Mrs. Ellison came to me. 
She behaved in such a Manner, when 

she became acquainted with what had
past, that tho' I was at first satisfied of
her Guilt, she began to stagger my
Opinion; and, at length, prevailed
upon me entirely to acquit her. She
raved like a Madwoman against my
Lord, swore he should not stay a Moment
in her House, and that she would
never speak to him more. In short,
had she been the most innocent Woman
in the World, she could not have spoke,
nor acted any otherwise; nor could she
have vented more Wrath and Indignation
against the Betrayer. 
‘That Part of her Denunciation of
Vengeance, which concerned my Lord's
leaving the House, she vowed should be
executed immediately; but then, seeming
to recollect herself, she said, “Consider,
my dear Child; it is for your Sake
alone I speak; will not such a Proceeding
give some Suspicion to your
Husband? I answered, that I valued
not that; that I was resolved to inform
my Husband of all, the Moment I saw
him;” with many Expressions of Detestation
of myself, and an Indifference
for Life, and for every Thing else. 

‘Mrs. Ellison, however, found Means
to soothe me, and to satisfy me with
my own Innocence; a Point, in which,
I believe, we are all easily convinced. 
In short, I was persuaded to acquit both
myself and her, to lay the whole Guilt
upon my Lord, and to resolve to conceal
it from my Husband. 
‘That whole Day I confined myself to
my Chamber, and saw no Person but
Mrs. Ellison. I was, indeed, ashamed
to look any one in the Face. Happily
for me, my Lord went into the Country
without attempting to come near me; 
for I believe his Sight would have driven
me to Madness. 
‘The next Day, I told Mrs. Ellison,
that I was resolved to leave her Lodgings
the Moment my Lord came to Town; 
not on her Account: (For I really inclined
to think her innocent;) but on
my Lord's, whose Face I was resolved,
if possible, never more to behold. She
told me, I had no Reason to quit her
House on that Score: For that my
Lord himself had left her Lodgings
that Morning, in Resentment, she believed, 

of the Abuses which she had
cast on him the Day before. 
‘This confirmed me in the Opinion of
her Innocence; nor hath she from that
Day to this, till my Acquaintance with
you, Madam, done any thing to forfeit
my Opinion. On the contrary, I owe
her many good Offices; amongst the rest
I have a Reversion of 150l. a Year
from my Lord, which I know was
owing to her Solicitations: For she is
not void of Generosity or Good-nature; 
tho' by what I have lately seen, I am
convinced she was the Cause of my
Ruin, and hath endeavoured to lay the
same Snares for you. 
‘But to return to my melancholy Story. 
My Husband returned at the appointed
Time; and I met him with an Agitation
of Mind not to be described. Perhaps
the Fatigue which he had undergone in
his Journey, and his Dissatisfaction at
his ill Success, prevented his taking Notice
of what I feared was too visible. 
All his Hopes were entirely frustrated; the
Clergyman had not received the Bishop's
Letter; and as to my Lord's he treated
it with Derision and Contempt. Tired 

as he was, Mr. Bennet would not sit
down 'till he had enquired for my Lord,
intending to go and pay his Compliments: 
Poor Man! he little suspected
that he had deceived him, as I have
since known, concerning the Bishop; 
much less did he suspect any other Injury. 
But the Lord–––the Villain was
gone out of Town, so that he was
forced to postpone all his Gratitude. 
‘Mr. Bennet returned to Town late on
the Saturday Night, nevertheless he performed
his Duty at Church the next
Day; but I refused to go with him. 
This, I think, was the first Refusal I was
guilty of since our Marriage; but I was
become so miserable, that his Presence,
which had been the Source of all my
Happiness, was become my Bane. I
will not say I hated to see him; but I
can say I was ashamed, indeed afraid to
look him in the Face. I was conscious
of I knew not what—Guilt I
hope it cannot be called.’ 
‘I hope not, nay I think not,’ cries
Amelia. 

‘My Husband,’ continued Mrs. Bennet,
‘perceived my Dissatisfaction, and imputed
it to his ill Success in the Country. 
I was pleased with this Self-Delusion; 
and yet when I fairly compute the Agonies
I suffered at his Endeavours to comfort
me on that Head, I paid most severely
for it. O my dear Mrs. Booth,
happy is the deceived Party between
true Lovers, and wretched indeed is the
Author of the Deceit. 
‘In this wretched Condition I past a
whole Week, the most miserable, I
think, of my whole Life, endeavouring
to humour my Husband's Delusion, and
to conceal my own Tortures; but I
had Reason to fear I could not succeed
long; for on the Saturday Night I perceived
a visible Alteration in his Behaviour
to me. He went to Bed in an
apparent ill Humour, turned sullenly
from me; and if I offered at any Endearments,
he gave me only peevish
Answers. 
‘After a restless turbulent Night, he
rose early on Sunday Morning and walked
down Stairs. I expected his Return 

to Breakfast, but was soon informed by
the Maid that he was gone forth; and
that it was no more than seven o'Clock. 
All this, you may believe, Madam, alarmed
me. I saw plainly he had discovered
the fatal Secret, tho' by what Means I
could not divine. The State of my
Mind was very little short of Madness. 
Sometimes I thought of running away
from my injured Husband, and sometimes
of putting an End to my Life. 
‘In the midst of such Perturbations,
I spent the Day. My Husband returned
in the Evening. —O Heavens, can
I describe what followed. —It is impossible,
I shall sink under the Relation. 
—He entered the Room, with a Face
as white as a Sheet, his Lips trembling,
and his Eyes red as Coals of Fire, and
starting as it were from his Head.’ — 
“Molly,” cries he, throwing himself into
his Chair, “are you well?” —‘Good
Heavens,’ says I, ‘what's the Matter? 
—Indeed, I can't say I am well.’ 
“No!” ‘says he,–––starting from his
Chair, “false Monster, you have betrayed
me, destroyed me, you have ruined your
Husband.” ‘Then looking like a Fury
he snatched off a large Book from the 

Table, and with the Malice of a Madman,
threw it at my Head, and knocked
me down backwards. He then caught
me up in his Arms, and kissed me with
most extravagant Tenderness; then
looking me stedfast in the Face for
several Moments, the Tears gushed in
a Torrent from his Eyes, and with his
utmost Violence he threw me again on
the Floor–––Kicked me, stamped upon
me. I believe, indeed, his Intent was
to kill me, and I believe he thought he
had accomplished it. 
‘I lay on the Ground for some Minutes
I believe, deprived of my Senses. When
I recovered myself, I found my Husband
lying by my Side on his Face, and the
Blood running from him. It seems
when he thought he had dispatched me,
he ran his Head with all his Force
against a Chest of Drawers which stood
in the Room, and gave himself a dreadful
Wound in his Head. 
‘I can truly say, I felt not the least
Resentment for the Usage I had received; 
I thought I deserved it all; tho' indeed
I little guessed what he had suffered from
me. I now used the most earnest Entreaties 

to him to compose himself; and
endeavoured with my feeble Arms to
raise him from the Ground. At length,
he broke from me, and springing from
the Ground flung himself into a Chair,
when looking wildly at me, he cried,––– 
“Go from me, Molly. I beseech you
leave me, I would not kill you.” –––‘He
then discovered to me—O Mrs. Booth,
can you not guess it? —I was indeed
polluted by the Villain–––I had infected
my Husband—O Heaven! why do
I live to relate any thing so horrid— 
I will not, I cannot yet survive it. I
cannot forgive myself. Heaven cannot
forgive me.—’ 
Here she became inarticulate with the
Violence of her Grief, and fell presently
into such Agonies, that the frighted Amelia
began to call aloud for some Assistance. 
Upon this a Maid Servant came up, who
seeing her Mistress in a violent Convulsion
Fit, presently screamed out she was dead. 
Upon which one of the other Sex made his
Appearance; and who should this be but
the honest Serjeant? whose Countenance
soon made it evident, that tho' a Soldier
and a brave one too, he was not the least 

concerned of all the Company on this
Occasion. 
The Reader, if he hath been acquainted
with Scenes of this Kind, very well knows
that Mrs. Bennet in the usual Time returned
again to the Possession of her Voice; 
the first Use of which she made, was to
express her Astonishment at the Presence
of the Serjeant, and with a frantic Air,
to enquire who he was. 
The Maid concluding that her Mistress
was not yet returned to her Senses, answered,
‘Why 'tis my Master, Madam. 
Heaven preserve your Senses, Madam––– 
Lord, Sir, my Mistress must be very
bad not to know you.’ 
What Atkinson thought at this Instant,
I will not say; but certain it is he looked
not over wise. He attempted twice to
take hold of Mrs. Bennet's Hand; but
she withdrew it hastily, and presently
after rising up from her Chair, she declared
herself pretty well again, and desired
Atkinson and the Maid to withdraw. 
Both of whom presently obeyed; the Serjeant
appearing by his Countenance to
want Comfort almost as much as the Lady 

had, to whose Assistance he had been
summoned. 
It is a good Maxim to trust a Person
entirely or not at all: For a Secret is
often innocently blabbed out by those
who know but half of it. Certain it is
that the Maid's Speech communicated a
Suspicion to the Mind of Amelia, which
the Behaviour of the Serjeant did not tend
to remove; what that is the sagacious
Readers may likewise probably suggest to
themselves; if not, they must wait our
Time for disclosing it. We shall now
resume the History of Mrs. Bennet, who
after many Apologies, proceeded to the
Matters in the next Chapter. 



The Conclusion of Mrs. Bennet's History. 
‘When I became sensible,’ cries
Mrs. Bennet, ‘of the Injury I
had done my Husband, I threw myself
at his Feet, and embracing his Knees,
while I bathed them with my Tears, I
begged a patient Hearing, declaring if
he was not satisfied with what I should
say, I would become a willing Victim 

of his Resentment. I said, and I said
truly, that if I owed my Death that
Instant to his Hands, I should have no
other Terrour, but of the fatal Consequence
which it might produce to himself. 
‘He seemed a little pacified, and bid
me say whatever I pleased. 
‘I then gave him a faithful Relation
of all that had happened. He heard
me with great Attention, and at the
Conclusion, cried, with a deep Sigh––– 
“O Molly, I believe it all. —You must
have been betrayed as you tell me; you
could not be guilty of such Baseness,
such Cruelty, such Ingratitude”–––‘He
then—O 'tis impossible to describe his
Behaviour—he exprest such Kindness,
such Tenderness, such Concern, for the
Manner in which he had used me— 
I cannot dwell on this Scene—I shall
relapse—You must excuse me.’ 
Amelia begged her to omit any thing
which so affected her; and she proceeded
thus. 

‘My Husband, who was more convinced
than I was of Mrs. Ellison's
Guilt, declared he would not sleep that
Night in her House. He then went out
to see for a Lodging; he gave me all
the Money he had, and left me to pay
her Bill, and put up the Cloaths, telling
me if I had not Money enough, I might
leave the Cloaths as a Pledge; but he
vowed he could not answer for himself,
if he saw the Face of Mrs. Ellison. 
‘Words cannot scarce express the Behaviour
of that artful Woman, it was so
kind and so generous. She said she did
not blame my Husband's Resentment,
nor could she expect any other, but
that he and all the World should censure
her–––That she hated her House almost
as much as we did, and detested her
Cousin, if possible, more. In fine, she
said I might leave my Cloaths there that
Evening; but that she would send them
to us the next Morning. That she
scorned the Thought of detaining them; 
and as for the paultry Debt, we might
pay her whenever we pleased: For to
do her Justice with all her Vices, she
hath some Good in her. 

‘Some Good in her, indeed!’ cried
Amelia, with great Indignation. 
‘We were scarce settled in our new
Lodgings,’ continued Mrs. Bennet,
‘when my Husband began to complain
of a Pain in his Inside. He told me
he feared he had done himself some Injury
in his Rage, and had burst something
within him. As to the odious––– 
I cannot bear the Thought, the great
Skill of his Surgeon soon entirely cured
him; but his other Complaint instead
of yielding to any Application, grew
still worse and worse, nor ever ended
till it brought him to his Grave. 
‘O Mrs. Booth, could I have been certain
that I had occasioned this, however
innocently I had occasioned it, I could
never have survived it; but the Surgeon
who opened him after his Death assured
me, that he died, of what they called
a Polypus in his Heart, and that nothing
which had happened on Account of me
was in the least the Occasion of it. 
‘I have, however, related the Affair
truly to you. The first Complaint I 

ever heard of the Kind, was within a
Day or two after we left Mrs. Ellison's; 
and this Complaint remained till his
Death, which might induce him perhaps
to attribute his Death to another Cause; 
but the Surgeon, who is a Man of
the highest Eminence, hath always
declared the contrary to me, with
the most positive Certainty; and this
Opinion hath been my only Comfort. 
‘When my Husband died, which was
about ten Weeks after we quitted Mrs.
Ellison's, of whom I had then a different
Opinion from what I have now,
I was left in the most wretched Condition
imaginable. I believe, Madam, she
shewed you my Letter. Indeed she did
every thing for me at that Time, which
I could have expected from the best of
Friends. She supplied me with Money
from her own Pocket, by which Means
I was preserved from a Distress in
which I must have otherwise inevitably
perished. 
‘Her Kindness to me in this Season
of Distress prevailed on me to return
again to her House. Why, indeed, 

should I have refused an Offer so very
convenient for me to accept, and which
seemed so generous in her to make? 
Here I lived a very retired Life, with
my little Babe, seeing no Company but
Mrs. Ellison herself, for a full Quarter
of a Year. At last Mrs. Ellison brought
me a Parchment from my Lord, in which
he had settled upon me, at her Instance,
as she told me, and as I believe it was,
an Annuity of 150l. a Year. This
was, I think, the very first time she
had mentioned his hateful Name to me
since my Return to her House. And
she now prevailed upon me, tho' I assure
you, not without much Difficulty,
to suffer him to execute the Deed in my
Presence. 
‘I will not describe our Interview,––– 
I am not able to describe it, and I have
often wondered how I found Spirits to
support it. This I will say for him,
that if he was not a real Penitent, no
Man alive could act the Part better. 
‘Beside Resentment, I had another
Motive of my Backwardness to agree
to such a Meeting. And that was Fear. 
I apprehended, and surely not without 

Reason, that the Annuity was rather
meant as a Bribe than a Recompence,
and that further Designs were laid
against my Innocence: But in this I
found myself happily deceived; for neither
then, nor at any time since, have
I ever had the least Solicitation of that
Kind. Nor indeed have I seen the least
Occasion to think my Lord had any
such Desires. 
‘Good Heavens! what are these Men! 
What is this Appetite, which must have
Novelty and Resistance for its Provocatives; 
and which is delighted with us
no longer than while we may be considered
in the Light of Enemies.’ 
‘I thank you, Madam,’ cries Amelia,
‘for relieving me from my Fears on your
Account; I trembled at the Consequence
of this second Acquaintance with such a
Man, and in such a Situation.’ 
‘I assure you, Madam, I was in no
Danger,’ returned Mrs. Bennet: ‘For
besides that I think I could have pretty
well relied on my own Resolution, I
have heard since, at St. Edmundsbury,
from an intimate Acquaintance of my 

Lord's, who was an entire Stranger to
my Affairs, that the highest Degree of
Inconstancy is his Character; and that
few of his numberless Mistresses have
ever received a second Visit from him. 
‘Well, Madam,’ continued she, ‘I
think I have little more to trouble you
with; unless I should relate to you, my
long ill State of Health; from which,
by the Advice of Dr. Thompson, I am
lately, I thank Heaven, recovered: 
Or, unless I should mention to you the
most grievous Accident that ever befel
me, the Loss of my poor dear Charly.’ 
–––Here she made a full Stop, and the
Tears ran down into her Bosom. 
Amelia was silent a few Minutes, while
she gave the Lady Time to vent her Passion; 
after which, she began to pour forth
a vast Profusion of Acknowledgements
for the Trouble she had taken in relating
her History; but chiefly, for the Motive
which had induced her to it; and for the
kind Warning which she had given her by
the little Note which Mrs. Bennet had
sent her that Morning. 

‘Yes, Madam,’ cries Mrs. Bennet, ‘I
am convinced, by what I have lately
seen, that you are the destined Sacrifice
to this wicked Lord; and that Mrs. Ellison,
whom I no longer doubt to have
been the Instrument of my Ruin, intended
to betray you in the same Manner. 
The Day I met my Lord in your
Apartment, I began to entertain some
Suspicions, and I took Mrs. Ellison very
roundly to Task upon them: Her Behaviour,
notwithstanding many Asseverations
to the contrary, convinced me
I was right; and I intended, more than
once, to speak to you, but could not; 
till last Night the Mention of the Masquerade
determined me to delay it no
longer. I therefore sent you that Note
this Morning; and am glad you so
luckily discovered the Writer, as it hath
given me this Opportunity of easing
my Mind; and of honestly shewing you,
how unworthy I am of your Friendship,
at the same Time that I so earnestly
desire it.’ 




Being the last Chapter of the Seventh Book. 
Amelia did not fail to make
proper Compliments to Mrs. Bennet,
on the Conclusion of her Speech in the
last Chapter. She told her, that from the
first Moment of her Acquaintance, she
had the strongest Inclination to her Friendship; 
and that her Desires of that Kind
were much increased by hearing her Story. 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ says she, ‘you are
much too severe a Judge on yourself: 
For they must have very little Candour,
in my Opinion, who look upon your
Case with any severe Eye. To me, I
assure you, you appear highly the Object
of Compassion; and I shall always
esteem you, as an innocent and an unfortunate
Woman.’ 
Amelia would then have taken her
Leave; but Mrs. Bennet so strongly pressed
her to stay to Breakfast, that at length
she complied: Indeed she had fasted so
long, and her gentle Spirits had been so
agitated with Variety of Passions that 

Nature very strongly seconded Mrs. Bennet's
Motion. 
Whilst the Maid was preparing the
Tea-equipage, Amelia, with a little Slyness
in her Countenance, asked Mrs. Bennet,
if Serjeant Atkinson did not lodge in
the same House with her. The other
reddened so extremely at the Question,
repeated the Serjeant's Name with such
Hesitation, and behaved so aukwardly,
that Amelia wanted no further Confirmation
of her Suspicions. She would not,
however, declare them abruptly to the
other; but began a Dissertation on the
Serjeant's Virtues; and after observing
the great Concern which he had manifested,
when Mrs. Bennet was in her Fit,
concluded with saying, she believed the
Serjeant would make the best Husband in
the World: For that he had great Tenderness
of Heart, and a Gentleness of
Manners, not often to be found in any
Man; and much seldomer in Persons of
his Rank. 
‘And why not in his Rank?’ said Mrs.
Bennet, ‘Indeed, Mrs. Booth, we rob the
lower Order of Mankind of their Due. 
I do not deny the Force and Power of 

Education; but when we consider how
very injudicious is the Education of the
better Sort in general, how little they
are instructed in the Practice of Virtue,
we shall not expect to find the
Heart much improved by it. And
even as to the Head, how very slightly
do we commonly find it improved, by
what is called a genteel Education! I
have myself, I think, seen Instances of
as great Goodness, and as great Understanding
too, among the lower Sort of
People, as among the higher. Let us
compare your Serjeant now, with the
Lord who hath been the Subject of
Conversation; on which Side would an
impartial Judge decide the Balance to
incline?’ 
‘How monstrous then,’ cries Amelia,
‘is the Opinion of those, who consider
our matching ourselves the least below
us in Degree, as a Kind of Contamination!’ 
‘A most absurd and preposterous Sentiment,’ 
answered Mrs. Bennet warmly,
‘how abhorrent from Justice, from common
Sense, and from Humanity–––but
how extremely incongruous with a Religion, 

which professes to know no Difference
of Degree; but ranks all Mankind
on the Footing of Brethren! Of
all Kinds of Pride, there is none so unchristian
as that of Station; in reality,
there is none so contemptible. Contempt,
indeed, may be said to be its
own Object: For my own Part, I know
none so despicable as those who despise
others.’ 
‘I do assure you,’ said Amelia, ‘you
speak my own Sentiments. I give you
my Word, I should not be ashamed of being
the Wife of an honest Man in any
Station. –––Nor, if I had been much
higher than I was, should I have thought
myself degraded, by calling our honest
Serjeant my Husband.’ 
‘Since you have made this Declaration,’ 
cries Mrs. Bennet, ‘I am sure you will
not be offended at a Secret I am going
to mention to you.’––– 
‘Indeed, my Dear,’ answered Amelia
smiling, ‘I wonder rather you have concealed
it so long; especially after the
many Hints I have given you.’ 

‘Nay, pardon me, Madam,’ replied
the other, ‘I do not remember any such
Hints; and, perhaps, you do not even
guess what I am going to say. My Secret
is this; that no Woman ever had so
sincere, so passionate a Lover, as you
have had in the Serjeant.’ 
‘I a Lover in the Serjeant! I!’ cries
Amelia a little surprized. 
‘Have Patience,’ answered the other,
‘–––I say you, my Dear. As much surprized
as you appear, I tell you no
more than the Truth; and yet it is a
Truth you could hardly expect to hear
from me; especially with so much good
Humour, since I will honestly confess
to you. –––But what need have I to confess,
what I know you guess already? ––– 
Tell me now sincerely, don't you
guess?’––– 
‘I guess, indeed, and hope,’ said she,
‘that he is your Husband.’ 
‘He is, indeed, my Husband,’ cries
the other, ‘and I am most happy in your
Approbation. In honest Truth, you
ought to approve my Choice; since 

you was every Way the Occasion of my
making it. What you said of him,
very greatly recommended him to my
Opinion; but he endeared himself to
me most, by what he said of you. In
short, I have discovered, that he hath
always loved you, with such a faithful,
honest, noble, generous Passion, that I
was consequently convinced his Mind
must possess all the Ingredients of such
a Passion; and what are these, but true
Honour, Goodness, Modesty, Bravery,
Tenderness, and, in a Word, every
human Virtue. –––Forgive me, my Dear; 
but I was uneasy till I became myself
the Object of such a Passion.’ 
‘And do you really think,’ said Amelia
smiling, ‘that I shall forgive you robbing
me of such a Lover? Or, supposing
what you banter me with, was
true, do you really imagine you could
change such a Passion?’ 
‘No, my Dear,’ answered the other,
‘I only hope I have changed the Object: 
For be assured, there is no greater
vulgar Error, than that it is impossible
for a Man who loves one Woman, ever
to love another. On the contrary, it is 

certain, that a Man who can love one
Woman so well at a Distance, will love
another better that is nearer to him. 
Indeed, I have heard one of the best
Husbands in the World, declare, in the
Presence of his Wife, that he had always
loved a Princess with Adoration. 
These Passions which reside only in very
amorous and very delicate Minds, feed
only on the Delicacies there growing; 
and leave all the substantial Food, and
enough of the Delicacy too for the
Wife.’ 
The Tea being now ready, Mrs. Bennet,
or if you please, for the future, Mrs. Atkinson,
proposed to call in her Husband; 
but Amelia objected. She said, she should
be glad to see him any other Time; but
was then in the utmost Hurry, as she had
been three Hours absent from all she most
loved. However, she had scarce drank a
Dish of Tea before she changed her Mind; 
and saying, she would not part Man and
Wife, desired Mr. Atkinson might appear. 
The Maid answered, that her Master
was not at home; which Words she had
scarce spoken, when he knocked hastily 

at the Door; and immediately came runing
into the Room, all pale and breathless; 
and addressing himself to Amelia,
cried out, ‘I am sorry, my dear Lady,
to bring you ill News; but Captain
Booth–––‘What! what!’ cries Amelia,
dropping the Tea-cup from her Hand,
‘is any Thing the Matter with him! ––– 
Don't be frightened, my dear Lady,’ 
said the Serjeant–––‘He is in very good
Health; but a Misfortune hath happened.’ 
–––‘Are my Children well?’ said
Amelia. –––‘O, very well,’ answered the
Serjeant. –––‘Pray, Madam, don't be
frightened; I hope it will signify Nothing
–––he is arrested–––but I hope to get
him out of their damned Hands immediately.’ 
‘Where is he,’ cries Amelia,
‘I will go to him this Instant!’ ‘He
begs you will not,’ answered the Serjeant. 
‘I have sent his Lawyer to him,
and am going back with Mrs. Ellison
this Moment; but I beg your Ladyship,
for his Sake, and for your own
Sake, not to go.’ ‘Mrs. Ellison!
what is Mrs. Ellison to do?’ cries Amelia,
‘–––I must and will go.’ Mrs. Atkinson
then interposed, and begged that she would
not hurry her Spirits; but compose herself,
and go home to her Children; whither
she would attend her. She comforted 

her with the Thoughts, that the Captain
was in no immediate Danger, that she
could go to him when she would; and desired
her, to let the Serjeant return with
Mrs. Ellison; saying, she might be of
Service; and that there was much Wisdom,
and no Kind of Shame, in making
Use of bad People on certain Occasions. 
‘And who,’ cries Amelia a little come
to herself, ‘hath done this barbarous
Action?’ 
‘One I am ashamed to name,’ cries
the Serjeant; ‘indeed, I had always a
very different Opinion of him; I could
not have believed any Thing but my
own Ears and Eyes; but Dr. Harrison
is the Man who hath done the Deed.’ 
‘Dr. Harrison!’ cries Amelia. –––‘Well
then, there is an End of all Goodness
in the World. I will never have a good
Opinion of any human Being more.’ 
The Serjeant begged, that he might
not be detained from the Captain; and
that if Amelia pleased to go home, he
would wait upon her. But she did not 

chuse to see Mrs. Ellison at this Time; 
and after a little Consideration, she resolved
to stay where she was; and Mrs.
Atkinson agreed to go and fetch her
Children to her, it being not many Doors
distant. 
The Serjeant then departed; Amelia,
in her Confusion, never having once
thought of wishing him Joy on his Marriage. 