




The Book begins with polite History. 
Before we return to the miserable
Couple, whom we left at the End
of the last Book, we will give our
Reader the more chearful View of the gay
and happy Family of Colonel James. 
Mrs. James when she could not, as we
have seen, prevail with Amelia to accept
that Invitation, which at the Desire of the
Colonel she had so kindly and obediently
carried her, returned to her Husband, and
acquainted him with the ill Success of her
Embassy; at which, to say the Truth, she 

was almost as much disappointed as the
Colonel himself: for he had not taken a
much stronger Liking to Amelia, than she
herself had conceived for Booth. This will
account for some Passages, which may
have a little surprised the Reader in the
former Chapters of this History, as we were
not then at Leisure to communicate to
them a Hint of this Kind: It was indeed
on Mr. Booth's Account that she had been
at the Trouble of changing her Dress at
the Masquerade. 
But her Passions of this Sort, happily
for her, were not extremely strong; she
was therefore easily baulked, and as she
met with no Encouragement from Booth,
she soon gave way to the Impetuosity of
Miss Mathews; and from that Time scarce
thought more of the Affair, 'till her Husband's
Design against the Wife revived hers
likewise; insomuch, that her Passion was,
at this Time, certainly strong enough for
Booth, to produce a good hearty Hatred
for Amelia, whom she now abused to the
Colonel in very gross Terms; both on the
Account of her Poverty, and her Insolence:
for so she termed the Refusal of all
her Offers. 

The Colonel seeing no Hopes of soon
possessing his new Mistress, began, like a
prudent and wise Man, to turn his Thoughts
towards the securing his old one. From
what his Wife had mentioned, concerning
the Behaviour of the Shepherdess, and particularly
her Preference of Booth, he had
little Doubt but that this was the identical
Miss Mathews. He resolved therefore
to watch her closely, in hopes of discovering
Booth's Intrigue with her. In this,
besides the Remainder of Affection which
he yet preserved for that Lady, he had
another View, as it would give him a fair
Pretence to quarrel with Booth; who, by
carrying on this Intrigue, would have broke
his Word and Honour given to him. And
he began now to hate poor Booth heartily,
from the same Reason from which Mrs.
James had contracted her Aversion to Amelia. 
The Colonel therefore employed an
inferior kind of Pimp to watch the Lodgings
of Miss Mathews, and to acquaint
him if Booth, whose Person was known to
the Pimp, made any Visit there. 

The Pimp faithfully performed his Office,
and having last Night made the wish'd
for Discovery, immediately acquainted his
Master with it. 
Upon this News the Colonel presently
dispatched to Booth the short Note which
we have before seen. He sent it to his own
House instead of Miss Mathews's, with
Hopes of that very Accident which actually
did happen. Not that he had any Ingredient
of the Bully in him, and desired to
be prevented from fighting, but with a
Prospect of injuring Booth in the Affection
and Esteem of Amelia, and of recommending
himself somewhat to her by
appearing in the Light of her Champion; 
for which Purpose he added that Compliment
to Amelia in his Letter. He concluded
upon the whole, that, if Booth himself
opened the Letter, he would certainly
meet him the next Morning; but if his
Wife should open it before he came home,
it might have the Effects before mentioned; 
and for his future Expostulation
with Booth, it would not be in Amelia's
Power to prevent it. 

Now it happened, that this Pimp had
more Masters than one. Amongst these
was the worthy Mr. Trent, for whom he
had often done Business of the pimping
Vocation. He had been employed indeed
in the Service of the great Peer himself,
under the Direction of the said Trent, and
was the very Person who had assisted the
said Trent in dogging Booth and his Wife
to the Opera-House on Masquerade
Night. 
This subaltern Pimp was with his Superior
Trent Yesterday Morning, when he
found a Bailiff with him in order to receive
his Instructions for the arresting Booth; 
when the Bailiff said it would be a very difficult
Matter to take him; for that to his
Knowledge he was as shy a Cock as any in
England. The Subaltern immediately acquainted
Trent with the Business in which
he was employ'd by the Colonel. Upon
which Trent enjoined him the Moment he
had set him to give immediate Notice
to the Bailiff; which he agreed to, and
performed accordingly. 
The Bailiff, on receiving the Notice,
immediately set out for his Stand at an 

Alehouse within three Doors of Miss Mathews's
Lodgings. At which, unfortunately
for poor Booth, he arrived a very
few Minutes before Booth left that Lady
in order to return to Amelia. 
These were several Matters, of which we
thought necessary our Reader should be
informed; for, besides that it conduces
greatly to a perfect Understanding of all
History, there is no Exercise of the Mind
of a sensible Reader more pleasant than
the tracing the several small and almost
imperceptible Links in every Chain of
Events by which all the great Actions of
the World are produced. We will now in
the next Chapter proceed with our History. 



In which Amelia visits her Husband. 
Amelia, after much anxious thinking,
in which she sometimes flattered
herself that her Husband was less guilty
than she had at first imagined him, and
that he had some good Excuse to make
for himself; (for indeed she was not so
able as willing to make one for him,) at
length resolved to set out for the Bailiff's 

Castle. Having therefore strictly
recommended the Care of her Children to
her good Landlady, she sent for a Hackney
Coach, and ordered the Coachman to
drive to Gray's-Inn-Lane. 
When she came to the House, and ask'd
for the Captain, the Bailiff's Wife, who
came to the Door, guessing by the Greatness
of her Beauty, and the Disorder of
her Dress, that she was a young Lady
of Pleasure, answered surlily, ‘Captain!
I do not know of any Captain that is
here, not I.’ For this good Woman was,
as well as Dame Purgante in Prior, a bitter
Enemy to all Whores; especially to those
of the handsome Kind; for some such she
suspected to go Shares with her in a certain
Property to which the Law gave her the
sole Right. 
Amelia replied, she was certain that Captain
Booth was there. ‘Well, if he is so,’ 
cries the Bailiff's Wife, ‘you may come
into the Kitchin if you will—and he
shall be called down to you if you have
any Business with him.’ At the same
Time she mutter'd something to herself, and
concluded a little more intelligibly, tho'
still in a muttering Voice, that she kept no
such House. 

Amelia, whose Innocence gave her no
Suspicion of the true Cause of this good
Woman's Sullenness, was frightened, and
began to fear she knew not what. At last
she made a shift to totter into the Kitchin,
when the Mistress of the House asked her,
‘Well, Madam, who shall I tell the Captain
wants to speak with him?’ 
‘I ask your Pardon, Madam,’ cries
Amelia, ‘in my Confusion I really forgot
you did not know me—tell him, if
you please, that I am his Wife.’ 
‘And are you indeed his Wife, Madam,’ 
cries Mrs. Bailiff, a little softened? 
‘Yes, indeed, and upon my Honour,’ 
answers Amelia. 
‘If this be the Case,’ cries the other,
‘you may walk up Stairs if you please. 
Heaven forbid I should part Man and
Wife. Indeed I think they can never
be too much together. But I never will
suffer any bad Doings in my House, nor
any of the Town Ladies to come to Gentlemen
here.’ 

Amelia answered, That she liked her the
better; for indeed, in her present Disposition,
Amelia was as much exasperated against
wicked Women as the virtuous Mistress
of the House, or any other virtuous Woman
could be. 
The Bailiff's Wife then ushered Amelia
up Stairs, and having unlocked the Prisoners
Door, cried ‘Captain, here is your
Lady, Sir, come to see you.’ At which
Words Booth started up from his Chair,
and caught Amelia in his Arms, embracing
her for a considerable Time with so much
Rapture, that the Bailiff's Wife, who was
an Eye-witness of this violent Fondness,
began to suspect whether Amelia had really
told her Truth. However she had some
little Awe of the Captain, and for fear of
being in the wrong did not interfere, but
shut the Door and turned the Key. 
When Booth found himself alone with
his Wife, and had vented the first Violence
of his Rapture in Kisses and Embraces, he
looked tenderly at her, and cried, ‘Is it
possible, Amelia, is it possible you can
have this Goodness to follow such a
Wretch as me to such a Place as this— 

or do you come to upbraid me with my
Guilt, and to sink me down to that Perdition
I so justly deserve?’ 
‘Am I so given to upbraiding then,’ 
says she, in a gentle Voice, ‘have I ever
given you Occasion to think I would sink
you to Perdition?’ 
‘Far be it from me, my Love, to think
so,’ answered he. ‘And yet you may
forgive the utmost Fears of an offending,
penitent Sinner. I know indeed
the Extent of your Goodness, and yet I
know my Guilt so great—’ 
‘Alas! Mr. Booth,’ said she, ‘What
Guilt is this which you mention, and
which you writ to me of last Night— 
Sure by your mentioning to me so much,
you intend to tell me more, nay indeed
to tell me all. —And not leave my Mind
open to Suspicions perhaps ten times worse
than the Truth.’ 
‘Will you give me a patient hearing?’ 
said he. 
‘I will indeed,’ answered she, ‘nay I
am prepared to hear the worst you can 

unfold; nay perhaps the worst is short
of my Apprehensions.’ 
Booth then, after a little further Apology,
began and related to her the whole
that had pass'd between him and Miss Mathews,
from their first Meeting in the Prison
to their Separation the preceding Evening. 
All which, as the Reader knows it already,
it would be tedious and unpardonable to
transcribe from his Mouth. He told her
likewise all that he had done and suffered,
to conceal his Transgression from her
Knowledge. This he assured her was the
Business of his Visit last Night, the Consequence
of which was, he declared in the
most solemn Manner, no other than an absolute
Quarrel with Miss Mathews, of
whom he had taken a final Leave. 
When he had ended his Narration, Amelia,
after a short Silence, answered,— 
‘Indeed, I firmly believe every Word
you have said—but I cannot now forgive
you the Fault you have confessed— 
and my Reason is—because I have forgiven
it long ago. Here, my Dear,’ said
she, ‘is an Instance that I am likewise capable
of keeping a Secret.’ —She then
delivered her Husband a Letter which she 

had some Time ago received from Miss Mathews,
and which was the same which that Lady
had mentioned, and supposed, as Booth had
never heard of it, that it had miscarried; 
for she sent it by the Penny-Post. In this
Letter, which was sign'd by a feigned
Name, she had acquainted Amelia with
the Infidelity of her Husband, and had
besides very greatly abused him; taxing
him with many Falshoods; and, among
the rest, with having spoken very slightingly
and disrespectfully of his Wife. 
Amelia never shin'd forth to Booth in so
amiable and great a Light; nor did his
own Unworthiness ever appear to him so
mean and contemptible, as at this Instant. 
However when he had read the Letter,
he uttered many violent Protestations to
her, that all which related to herself was
absolutely false. 
‘I am convinced it is,’ said she. ‘I
would not have a Suspicion of the contrary
for the World. I assure you I had,
'till last Night revived it in my Memory,
almost forgot the Letter; for as I
well knew from whom it came, by her
mentioning Obligations which she had
conferred on you, and which you had 

more than once spoken to me of: I
made large Allowances for the Situation
you was then in; and I was the more
satisfied, as the Letter itself, as well as
many other Circumstances, convinced me
the Affair was at an End.’ 
Booth now utter'd the most extravagant
Expressions of Admiration and Fondness
that his Heart could dictate, and accompanied
them with the warmest Embraces. 
All which Warmth and Tenderness
she return'd; and Tears of Love
and Joy gush'd from both their Eyes. So
ravish'd indeed were their Hearts, that
for some Time they both forgot the dreadful
Situation of their Affairs. 
This however was but a short Reverie. 
It soon recurr'd to Amelia that tho' she
had the Liberty of leaving that House
when she pleased, she could not take her
beloved Husband with her. This Thought
stung her tender Bosom to the Quick, and
she could not so far command herself, as
to refrain from many sorrowful Exclamations
against the Hardship of their Destiny; 
but when she saw the Effect they had upon
Booth, she stifled her rising Grief, forced
a little Cheerfulness into her Countenance, 

and exerting all the Spirits she could raise
within herself, expressed her Hopes of
seeing a speedy End to their Sufferings. 
She then ask'd her Husband what she
should do for him, and to whom she should
apply for his Deliverance. 
‘You know, my Dear, cries Booth, that
the Doctor is to be in Town some Time
to Day. My Hopes of immediate Redemption
are only in him; and if that
can be obtain'd, I make no Doubt but
of the Success of that Affair which is in the
Hands of a Gentleman who hath faithfully
promised to serve me, and in whose Power
I am so well assured it is to succeed.’ 
Thus did this poor Man support his
Hopes by a Dependance on that Ticket
which he had so dearly purchased of one
who pretended to manage the Wheels in
the Great State Lottery of Preferment. 
A Lottery indeed which hath this to recommend
it, that many poor Wretches
feed their Imaginations with the Prospect
of a Prize during their whole Lives, and
never discover they have drawn a Blank. 
Amelia, who was of a pretty sanguine
Temper, and was entirely ignorant of 

these Matters, was full as easy to be deceived
into Hopes as her Husband; but
in Reality at present she turn'd her Eyes
to no distant Prospect; the Desire of regaining
her Husband's Liberty having engrossed
her whole Mind. 
While they were discoursing on these
Matters, they heard a violent Noise in the
House, and immediately after several
Persons passed by their Door up Stairs to
the Apartment over their Head. This
greatly terrified the gentle Spirit of Amelia,
and she cried—‘Good Heavens, my
Dear, must I leave you in this horrid
Place? I am terrified with a thousand
Fears concerning you.’ 
Booth endeavoured to comfort her, saying,
that he was in no Manner of Danger,
and that he doubted not but that the Doctor
would soon be with him. —‘And stay,
my Dear,’ cries he, ‘now I recollect,
suppose you should apply to my old
Friend James; for I believe you are
pretty well satisfied, that your Apprehensions
of him were groundless. I have
no Reason to think but that he would be
as ready to serve me as formerly.’ 

Amelia turned pale as Ashes at the
Name of James, and instead of making a
direct Answer to her Husband, she laid
hold of him, and cried, ‘My Dear, I
have one Favour to beg of you, and I
insist on your granting it me.’ 
Booth readily swore he would deny her
nothing. 
It is only this, my Dear, said she, that
if that detested Colonel comes, you will
not see him. Let the People of the House
tell him you are not here. 
He knows nothing of my being here,
answer'd Booth; ‘but why should I refuse
to see him, if he should be kind enough
to come hither to me? Indeed, my
Amelia, you have taken a Dislike to that
Man without sufficient Reason.’ 
‘I speak not upon that Account, cries
Amelia; but I have had Dreams last
Night about you two. Perhaps you
will laugh at my Folly; but pray indulge
it. Nay I insist on your Promise
of not denying me.’ 

‘Dreams! my dear Creature, answer'd
he. What Dream can you have had
of us?’ 
‘One too horrible to be mention'd, reply'd
she. —I cannot think of it
without Horror, and unless you will
promise me not to see the Colonel 'till
I return, I positively will neverleave
you.’ 
‘Indeed, my Amelia, said Booth, I never
knew you unreasonable before. 
How can a Woman of your Sense talk
of Dreams?’ 
‘Suffer me to be once at least unreasonable,
said Amelia; as you are so good-natur'd
to say I am not often so. Consider,
what I have lately suffer'd, and
how weak my Spirits must be at this
Time.’ 
As Booth was going to speak, the Bailiff
without any Ceremony enter'd the Room; 
and cried, ‘No Offence, I hope, Madam,
my Wife, it seems, did not know you. 
She thought the Captain had a Mind
for a Bit of Flesh by the Bye. But 

I have quieted all Matters: for I
know you very well; I have seen that
handsome Face many a Time, when I
have been waiting upon the Captain formerly. 
No Offence, I hope, Madam; 
but if my Wife was as handsome as you
are—I should not look for worse Goods
abroad.’ 
Booth conceived some Displeasure at this
Speech; but he did not think proper to
express more than a Pish. —And then
ask'd the Bailiff what was the Meaning of
the Noise they heard just now. 
‘I know of no Noise, answer'd the
Bailiff. Some of my Men have been
carrying a Piece of bad Luggage up
Stairs; a poor Rascal that resisted the
Law and Justice; so I gave him a Cut
or two with a Hanger. If they should
prove mortal, he must thank himself
for it. If a Man will not behave like a
Gentleman to an Officer, he must take
the Consequence; but I must say that
for you, Captain, you behave yourself
like a Gentleman; and therefore I shall
always use you as such; and I hope you
will find Bail soon with all my Heart. 
This is but a paultry Sum to what the 

last was; and I do assure you, there is
nothing else against you in the Office.’ 
The latter Part of the Bailiff's Speech
somewhat comforted Amelia, who had been a
little frightened by the former; and she
soon after took Leave of her Husband,
to go in Quest of the Doctor, who, as
Amelia had heard that Morning, was expected
in Town that very Day, which
was somewhat sooner than he had intended
at his Departure. 
Before she went, however, she left a
strict Charge with the Bailiff, who usher'd
her very civilly down Stairs, that if one Colonel
James came there to enquire for her
Husband, he should deny that he was
there. 
She then departed; and the Bailiff immediately
gave a very strict Charge to his
Wife, his Maid, and his Followers, that
if one Colonel James, or any one from
him, should enquire after the Captain,
that they should let him know he had
the Captain above Stairs: for he doubted
not but that the Colonel was one of Booth's
Creditors; and he hoped for a second Bail
Bond by his Means. 




Containing Matter pertinent to the History. 
Amelia in her Way to the Doctor's
determin'd just to stop at her own
Lodgings which lay a little out of the
Road, and to pay a momentary Visit to
her Children. 
This was fortunate enough; for had she
call'd at the Doctor's House, she would
have heard nothing of him, which would
have caused in her some Alarm and Disappointment; 
for the Doctor was set down
at Mrs. Atkinson's, where he was directed
to Amelia's Lodgings, to which he went
before he called at his own; and here
Amelia now found him playing with her
two Children. 
The Doctor had been a little surprized
at not finding Amelia at home, or any
one that could give any Account of her. 
He was now more surprized to see her
come in in such a Dress, and at the Disorder
which he very plainly perceived in her
pale and melancholy Countenance. He
addressed her first (for indeed she was in 

no great Haste to speak) and cry'd, ‘My
dear Child, what is the Matter? where
is your Husband? Some Mischief I am
afraid hath happen'd to him in my Absence.’ 
‘O, my dear Doctor, answer'd Amelia,
sure some good Angel hath sent you
hither. My poor Will is arrested again. 
I left him in the most miserable Condition
in the very House whence your
Goodness formerly redeem'd him.’ 
‘Arrested! cries the Doctor. Then
it must be for some very inconsiderable
Trifle.’ 
‘I wish it was, said Amelia; but it is
for no less than 50l.’ 
‘Then, cries the Doctor, he hath been
disingenuous with me. He told me
he did not owe ten Pounds in the World
for which he was liable to be sued.’ 
‘I know not what to say, cries Amelia. 
Indeed I am afraid to tell you the
Truth.’ 

‘How, Child,’ said the Doctor—‘I
hope you will never disguise it to any
one, especially to me. Any Prevarication,
I promise you, will forfeit my
Friendship for ever.’ 
‘I will tell you the whole,’ cries Amelia,
‘and rely entirely on your Goodness.’ 
She then related the gaming Story, not
forgetting to set in the fullest Light, and
to lay the strongest Emphasis on his Promise
never to play again. 
The Doctor fetched a deep Sigh when
he had heard Amelia's Relation, and cried,
‘I am sorry, Child, for the Share you
are to partake in your Husband's Sufferings; 
but as for him, I really think he
deserves no Compassion. You say he
hath promised never to play again; but
I must tell you he hath broke his Promise
to me already: for I had heard he
was formerly addicted to this Vice, and
had given him sufficient Caution against
it. You will consider, Child, I am already
pretty largely engaged for him,
every Farthing of which I am sensible
I must pay. You know I would go
to the utmost Verge of Prudence to 

serve you; but I must not exceed my
Ability, which is not very great; and I
have several Families on my Hands,
who are by Misfortune alone brought to
Want. I do assure you I cannot at present
answer for such a Sum as this, without
distressing my own Circumstances.’ 
‘Then Heaven have Mercy upon us
all,’ cries Amelia; ‘for we have no other
Friend on Earth—My Husband is undone; 
and these poor little Wretches must
be starved.’ 
The Doctor cast his Eyes on the Children,
and then cried—‘I hope not so. 
I told you I must distress my Circumstances,
and I will distress them this
once on your Account, and on the Account
of these poor little Babes—But
Things must not go on any longer in
this Way—You must take an heroic
Resolution. I will hire a Coach for you
To-morrow Morning, which shall carry
you all down to my Parsonage-House. 
There you shall have my Protection, 'till
something can be done for your Husband; 
of which, to be plain with you,
I at present see no Likelihood.’ 

Amelia fell upon her Knees in an Ecstasy
of Thanksgiving to the Doctor, who
immediately raised her up and placed her
in her Chair. She then recollected herself
and said—‘O my worthy Friend, I have
still another Matter to mention to you,
in which I must have both your Advice
and Assistance. My Soul blushes to give
you all this Trouble; but what other
Friend have I—indeed what other
Friend could I apply to so properly on
such an Occasion?’ 
The Doctor, with a very kind Voice
and Countenance, desired her to speak. 
She then said—‘O sir, that wicked Colonel,
whom I have mentioned to you
formerly, hath picked some Quarrel with
my Husband,‘ (for she did not think proper
to mention the Cause) and hath sent
him a Challenge. It came to my Hand
last Night after he was arrested; I opened
and read it.’ 
‘Give it me, Child,’ said the Doctor. 
She answered she had burnt it; as was
indeed true. ‘But I remember it was an 

Appointment to meet at Sword and
Pistol this Morning at Hide-Park.’ 
‘Make yourself easy, my dear Child,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘I will take Care to prevent
any Mischief.’ 
‘But consider, my dear Sir,’ said she,
‘this is a tender Matter. My Husband's
Honour is to be preserved as well as his
Life.’ 
‘And so is his Soul, which ought to be
the dearest of all Things,’ cries the
Doctor. ‘Honour! Nonsense. Can Honour
dictate to him to disobey the express
Commands of his Maker, in Compliance
with a Custom established by a
Set of Blockheads, founded on false
Principles of Virtue, in direct Opposition
to the plain and positive Precepts of
Religion, and tending manifestly to give
a Sanction to Ruffians, and to protect
them in all the Ways of Impudence and
Villany?’ 
‘All this, I believe, is very true,’ cries
Amelia; ‘but yet you know, Doctor, the
Opinion of the World.’ 

‘You talk simply, Child,’ cries the
Doctor. ‘What is the Opinion of the
World opposed to Religion and Virtue? 
But you are in the wrong. It is not the
Opinion of the World; it is the Opinion
of the Idle, Ignorant, and Profligate. 
It is impossible it should be the Opinion
of one Man of Sense, who is in Earnest
in his Belief of our Religion. Chiefly
indeed it hath been upheld by the Nonsense
of Women; who either from their
extreme Cowardice, and Desire of Protection,
or, as Mr. Bayle thinks, from
their excessive Vanity, have been always
forward to countenance a Set of Hectors
and Bravoes, and to despise all Men of
Modesty and Sobriety; tho' these are
often, at the Bottom, not only the better
but the braver Men.’ 
‘You know, Doctor,’ cries Amelia, ‘I
have never presumed to argue with you; 
your Opinion is to me always Instruction,
and your Word a Law.’ 
‘Indeed, Child,’ cries the Doctor, ‘I
know you are a good Woman; and yet
I must observe to you, that this very
Desire of feeding the Passion of female 

Vanity with the Heroism of her Man,
old Homer seems to make the Characteristic
of a bad and loose Woman. He
introduces Helen upbraiding her Gallant
with having quitted the Fight, and left
the Victory to Menelaus, and seeming to
be sorry that she had left her Husband,
only because he was the better Duellist
of the two; but in how different a Light
doth he represent the tender and chaste
Love of Andromache to her worthy Hector! 
She dissuades him from exposing himself
to Danger, even in a just Cause. This
is indeed a Weakness; but it is an amiable
one, and becoming the true feminine
Character; but a Woman, who out
of heroic Vanity (for so it is) would hazard
not only the Life, but the Soul too
of her Husband in a Duel, is a Monster,
and ought to be painted in no other Character
but that of a Fury.’ 
‘I assure you, Doctor,’ cries Amelia,
‘I never saw this Matter in the odious
Light, in which you have truly represented
it, before. I am ashamed to recollect
what I have formerly said on this
Subject. —And yet whilst the Opinion
of the World is as it is, one would wish
to comply as far as possible—especially 

as my Husband, is an Officer of the
Army. If it can be done therefore with
Safety to his Honour—’ 
‘Again Honour!’ cries the Doctor,
‘indeed I will not suffer that noble Word
to be so basely and barbarously prostituted. 
I have known some of these
Men of Honour, as they call themselves, to
be the most arrant Rascals in the Universe.’ 
‘Well. I ask your Pardon, said she,—Reputation
then, if you please—or any
other Word you like better—you know
my Meaning very well.’ 
‘I do know your Meaning,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘and Virgil knew it a great While
ago. The next Time you see your Friend
Mrs. Atkinson, ask her what it was made
Dido fall in Love with Æneas.’ 
‘Nay, dear Sir,’ said Amelia, ‘do not
rally me so unmercifully; think where
my poor Husband is now.’ 
‘He is,’ answered the Doctor, ‘where
I will presently be with him. In the
mean Time, do you pack up every Thing
in order for your Journey To morrow; 

for, if you are wife, you will not trust
your Husband a Day longer in this
Town—therefore to packing— 
Amelia promised she would—though
indeed she wanted not any Warning for
her Journey on this Account; for when
she packed up herself in the Coach, she
packed up her All. However she did not
think proper to mention this to the Doctor; 
for as he was now in pretty good
Humour, she did not care to venture again
discomposing his Temper. 
‘The Doctor then set out for Gray's Inn
Lane; and, as soon as he was gone, Amelia
began to consider of her Incapacity to
take a Journey in her present Situation,
without even a clean Shift. At last she resolved,
as she was possessed of seven Guineas
and a Half, to go to her Friend and
redeem some of her own and her Husband's
Linen out of Captivity; indeed just so
much, as would render it barely possible
for them to go out of Town with any kind
of Decency.’ And this Resolution she immediately
executed. 
As soon as she had finished her Business
with the Pawnbroker, (if a Man who lends 

under thirty per Cent. deserves that Name)
he said to her, ‘Pray, Madam, did you
know that Man who was here Yesterday,
when you brought the Picture?’ Amelia
answered in the Negative. ‘Indeed, Madam,’ 
said the Broker, ‘he knows you,
though he did not recollect you while
you was here, as your Hood was drawn
over your Face; but the Moment you
was gone, he begged to look at the
Picture, which I thinking no Harm
permitted. He had scarce looked upon
it, when he cried out—By Heaven and
Earth it is her Picture. He then asked
me if I knew you—Indeed, says I, I
never saw the Lady before.’ 
In this last Particular, however, the
Pawnbroker a little savoured of his Profession,
and made a small Deviation from
the Truth: for when the Man had asked him
if he knew the Lady, he answered she was
some poor undone Woman, who had
pawned all her Cloaths to him the Day
before; and I suppose, says he, this Picture
is the last of her Goods and Chattels. 
This Hint we thought proper to give the
Reader, as it may chance to be material. 
Amelia answered coldly, that she had 

taken so very little Notice of the Man,
that she scarce remembered he was there. 
‘I assure you, Madam,’ says the Pawnbroker,
‘he hath taken very great Notice
of you; for the Man changed Countenance
upon what I said, and presently
after begged me to give him a Dram. 
Oho! thinks I to myself, are you thereabouts? 
I would not be so much in
Love with some Folks, as some People
are, for more Interest than I shall ever
make of a thousand Pound.’ 
Amelia blushed, and said with some
Peevishness that she knew nothing of the
Man; but supposed he was some impertinent
Fellow or other. 
‘Nay, Madam,’ answered the Pawnbroker,
‘I assure you he is not worthy
your regard. He is a poor Wretch, and
I believe I am possessed of most of his
Moveables. However I hope you are not
offended; for indeed he said no Harm; 
but he was very strangely disordered,
that is the Truth of it.’ 
Amelia was very desirous of putting an
End to this Conversation, and altogether 

as eager to return to her Children; she
therefore bundled up her Things as fast as
she could, and calling for a Hackney-Coach
directed the Coachman to her
Lodgings, and bid him drive her Home
with all the Haste he could. 



In which Dr. Harrison visits Colonel James. 
The Doctor, when he left Amelia,
intended to go directly to Booth; 
but he presently changed his Mind and
determined first to call on the Colonel, as
he thought it was proper to put an End to
that Matter, before he gave Booth his Liberty. 
The Doctor found the two Colonels,
James and Bath, together. They both received
him very civilly; for James was a
very well bred Man; and Bath always
shewed a particular Respect to the Clergy,
he being indeed a perfect good Christian,
except in the Articles of Fighting and
Swearing. 
Our Divine sat some time without mentioning
the Subject of his Errand, in Hopes 

that Bath would go away; but when he
found no Likelihood of that, (for indeed
Bath was of the two much the most pleased
with his Company) he told James that he
had something to say to him relating to
Mr. Booth, which he believed he might
speak before his Brother. 
‘Undoudtedly, Sir,’ said James; ‘for
there can be no Secrets between us which
my Brother may not hear.’ 
‘I come then to you, Sir,’ said the
Doctor, ‘from the most unhappy Woman
in the World, to whose Afflictions you
have very greatly and very cruelly added,
by sending a Challenge to her Husband,
which hath very luckily fallen into
her Hands; for had the Man, for whom
you designed it, received it, I am afraid
you would not have seen me upon this
Occasion.’ 
‘If I writ such a Letter to Mr. Booth,
Sir,’ said James, ‘you may be assured I
did not expect this Visit in answer to it.’ 
‘I do not think you did,’ cries the
Doctor; ‘but you have great Reason to
thank Heaven for ordering this Matter 

contrary to your Expectations. I know
not what Trifle may have drawn this
Challenge from you; but after what I
have some Reason to know of you, Sir,
I must plainly tell you, that if you had
added to your Guilt already committed
against this Man that of having his
Blood upon your Hands, your Soul
would have become as black as Hell
itself.’ 
‘Give me leave to say,’ cries the Colonel,
‘this is a Language which I am not
used to hear; and if your Cloth was not
your Protection, you should not give
it me with Impunity. After what you
know of me, Sir! What do you presume
to know of me to my Disadvantage?’ 
‘You say my Cloth is my Protection, Colonel,
answered the Doctor, therefore pray lay
aside your Anger; I do not come with any
Design of affronting or offending you.—’ 
‘Very well,’ cries Bath, ‘that Declaration
is sufficient from a Clergyman,
let him say what he pleases.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ says the Doctor, very
mildly, ‘I consult equally the Good of 

you both, and, in a spiritual Sense, more
especially yours; for you know you have
injured this poor Man.’ 
‘So far on the contrary, cries James, that
I have been his greatest Benefactor; I scorn
to upbraid him; but you force me to it. 
Nor have I ever done him the least
Injury.’ 
‘Perhaps not,’ said the Doctor; ‘I will
alter what I have said. —But for this
I apply to your Honour—Have you
not intended him an Injury, the very
Intention of which cancels every Obligation?’ 
‘How, Sir,’ answered the Colonel— 
‘What do you mean?’ 
‘My Meaning,’ replied the Doctor, ‘is
almost too tender to mention—Come,
Colonel, examine your own Heart; and
then answer me on your Honour, if you
have not intended to do him the highest
Wrong which one Man can do another.’ 
‘I do not know what you mean by the
Question,’ answered the Colonel. 

‘D&wblank;n me, the Question is very
transparent,’ cries, Bath. ‘From any
other Man it would be an Affront with
the strongest Emphasis, but from one
of the Doctor's Cloth it demands a categorical
Answer.’ 
‘I am not a Papist, Sir,’ answered Colonel
James, ‘nor am I obliged to confess
to my Priest. But if you have any thing
to say, speak openly—for I do not understand
your Meaning.’ 
‘I have explained my Meaning to you
already,’ said the Doctor, ‘in a Letter I
wrote to you on the Subject—a Subject
which I am sorry I should have any
Occasion to write upon to a Christian.’ 
‘I do remember now,’ cries the Colonel,
‘that I received a very impertinent Letter
something like a Sermon, against Adultery; 
but I did not expect to hear the
Author own it to my Face.’ 
‘That brave Man then, Sir,’ answered
the Doctor, ‘stands before you who dares
own he wrote that Letter, and dares affirm
too, that it was writ on a just and 

strong Foundation. But if the Hardness
of your Heart could prevail on you to
treat my good Intention with Contempt
and Scorn, what pray could induce you to
shew it, nay to give it Mr. Booth? What
Motive could you have for that, unless
you meant to insult him, and to provoke
your Rival to give you that Opportunity
of putting him out of the World, which
you have since wickedly sought by your
Challenge?’ 
‘I give him the Letter!’ said the Colonel. 
‘Yes, Sir, answered the Doctor, he shewed
me the Letter, and affirmed that you
gave it him at the Masquerade.’ 
‘He is a lying Rascal then,’ said the
Colonel very passionately. ‘I scarce took
the Trouble of reading the Letter, and
lost it out of my Pocket.’ 
Here Bath interfered, and explain'd this
Affair in the Manner in which it happen'd,
and with which the Reader is already acquainted. 
He concluded by great Eulogiums
on the Performance, and declared
it was one of the most enthusiastic (meaning 

perhaps ecclesiastic) Letters that ever
was written. ‘And d&wblank;n me,’ says he,
‘if I do not respect the Author with the
utmost Emphasis of thinking.’ 
The Doctor now recollected what had
passed with Booth, and perceived he had
made a Mistake of one Colonel for another. 
This he presently acknowledged to Colonel
James, and said that the Mistake had been
his and not Booth's. 
Bath now collected all his Gravity, and
Dignity, as he called it, into his Countenance,
and addressing himself to James,
said—‘And was that Letter writ to you,
Brother? —I hope you never deserved
any Suspicion of this Kind.’ 
‘Brother,’ cries James, ‘I am accountable
to myself for my Actions, and shall
not render an Account either to you, or
to that Gentleman.’ 
‘As to me, Brother,’ answered Bath,
‘you say right; but I think this Gentleman
may call you to an Account; nay I
think it is his Duty so to do. And let
me tell you, Brother, there is One much
greater than he to whom you must 

give an Account. Mrs. Booth is really
a fine Woman, a Lady of most imperious
and majestick Presence. I have
heard you often say, that you liked her; 
and if you have quarrelled with her
Husband upon this Account, by all the
Dignity of Man, I think you ought to
ask his Pardon.’ 
‘Indeed, Brother,’ cries James, ‘I can
bear this no longer—you will make me
angry presently.’ 
‘Angry! Brother James,’ cries Bath— 
‘angry! —I love you, Brother, and have
Obligations to you. I will say no more
—but I hope you know I do not fear
making any Man angry.’ 
James answered, he knew it well; and
then the Doctor apprehending that while
he was stopping up one Breach, he should
make another, presently interfered and
turned the Discourse back to Booth. ‘You
tell me, Sir,’ said he to James, ‘that
my Gown is my Protection; let it then
at least protect me where I have had no
Design in offending; where I have consulted
your highest Welfare, as in truth
I did in writing this Letter. And if you 

did not in the least deserve any such
Suspicion, still you have no Cause
for Resentment. Caution against Sin,
even to the Innocent, can never be unwholesome. 
But this I assure you, whatever
Anger you have to me, you can
have none to poor Booth, who was entirely
ignorant of my writing to you,
and who, I am certain, never entertain'd
the least Suspicion of you; on the contrary,
reveres you with the highest Esteem,
and Love and Gratitude. Let
me therefore reconcile all Matters between
you, and bring you together before
he hath even heard of this Challenge.’ 
‘Brother,’ cries Bath, ‘I hope I shall
not make you angry—I lie when I
say so; for I am indifferent to any Man's
Anger—Let me be an Accessary to
what the Doctor hath said. I think I
may be trusted with Matters of this
Nature, and it is a little unkind that if
you intended to send a Challenge you
did not make me the Bearer. But indeed,
as to what appears to me, this
Matter may be very well made up; and
as Mr. Booth doth not know of the
Challenge, I don't see why he ever 

should, any more than your giving him
the lie just now; but that he shall never
have from me, nor I believe from this
Gentleman; for indeed if he should, it
would be incumbent upon him to cut
your Throat.’ 
‘Lookee, Doctor,’ said James, ‘I do
not deserve the unkind Suspicion you
just now threw out against me. I never
thirsted after any Man's Blood, and as
for what hath passed, since this Discovery
hath happened, I may perhaps not
think it worth my while to trouble myself
any more about it.’ 
The Doctor was not contented with
perhaps, he insisted on a firm Promise,
to be bound with the Colonel's Honour. 
This at length he obtained, and then departed
well satisfied. 
In Fact, the Colonel was ashamed to
avow the real Cause of the Quarrel to
this good Man, or indeed to his Brother
Bath, who would not only have condemned
him equally with the Doctor, but
would possibly have quarrelled with him on
his Sister's Account, whom, as the Reader
must have observed, he loved above all 

things; and in plain Truth, though the
Colonel was a brave Man, and dared to
fight, yet he was altogether as willing to
let it alone; and this made him now and
then give a little Way to the Wrongheadedness
of Colonel Bath, who, with all the
other Principles of Honour and Humanity
made no more of cutting the Throat of a
Man upon any of his Punctilio's than a
Butcher doth of killing Sheep. 



What passed at the Bailiff's House. 
The Doctor now set forward to his
Friend Booth, and as he past by the
Door of his Attorney in the Way, he
called upon him, and took him with him. 
The Meeting between him and Booth
need not be expatiated on. The Doctor
was really angry, and tho' he deferred his
Lecture to a more proper Opportunity,
yet as he was no Dissembler (indeed he
was incapable of any Disguise) he could
not put on a Show of that Heartiness with
which he had formerly used to receive his
Friend. 

Booth at last began himself in the following
Manner. ‘Doctor, I am really
ashamed to see you; and if you knew
the Confusion of my Soul on this Occasion,
I am sure you would pity rather
than upbraid me—And yet I can say
with great Sincerity, I rejoice in this
last Instance of my Shame, since I am
like to reap the most solid Advantage
from it.’ The Doctor stared at this, and
Booth thus proceeded: ‘Since I have been
in this wretched Place, I have employ'd
my Time almost entirely in reading over
a Series of Sermons, which are contained
in that Book,’ (meaning Dr. Barrow's
Works, which then lay on the Table before
him,) ‘in Proof of the Christian Religion,
and so good an Effect have they
had upon me, that I shall, I believe,
be the better Man for them as long as I
live. I have not a Doubt, (for I own I
have had such) which remains now unsatisfied. 
—If ever an Angel might be
thought to guide the Pen of a Writer,
surely the Pen of that great and good
Man had such an Assistant.’ The Doctor
readily concurred in the Praises of
Dr. Barrow, and added—‘You say you
have had your Doubts, young Gentleman, 

indeed I did not know that— 
And pray, what were your Doubts?’ 
‘Whatever they were, Sir,’ said Booth,
‘they are now satisfied, as I believe those of
every impartial and sensible Reader will be,
if he will, with due Attention, read over
these excellent Sermons. Very well,’ answer'd
the Doctor, ‘tho' I have conversed,
I find, with a false Brother hitherto, I am
glad you are reconciled to Truth at last,
and I hope your future Faith will have
some Influence on your future Life. I
need not tell you, Sir,’ replied Booth,
‘that will always be the Case, where Faith
is sincere, as I assure you mine is. Indeed
I never was a rash Disbeliever; my
chief Doubt was founded on this, that
as Men appeared to me to act entirely
from their Passions, their Actions could
have neither Merit nor Demerit. A very
worthy Conclusion truly,’ cries the Doctor; 
‘but if Men act, as I believe they
do, from their Passions, it would be
fair to conclude that Religion to be true
which applies immediately to the strongest
of these Passions; Hope and Fear, chusing
rather to rely on its Rewards and Punishments,
than on that native Beauty
of Virtue which some of the antient Philosophers
thought proper to recommend 

to their Disciples. —But we will defer
this Discourse till another Opportunity; 
at present, as the Devil hath thought
proper to set you free, I will try if I can
prevail on the Bailiff to do the same.’ 
The Doctor had really not so much
Money in Town as Booth's Debt amounted
to, and therefore though he would otherwise
very willingly have paid it, he
was forced to give Bail to the Action. 
For which Purpose, as the Bailiff was a
Man of great Form, he was obliged to
get another Person to be bound with him. 
This Person, however, the Attorney undertook
to procure, and immediately set
out in quest of him. 
During his Absence the Bailiff came into
the Room, and addressing himself to
the Doctor, said, ‘I think, Sir, your Name
is Dr. Harrison.’ The Doctor immediately
acknowledged his Name. Indeed the Bailiff
had seen it to a Bail-Bond before. 
‘Why then, Sir, said the Bailiff, there is a
Man above in a dying Condition, that
desires the Favour of speaking to you; 
I believe he wants you to pray by
him.’ 

The Bailiff himself was not more ready
to execute his Office on all Occasions for
his Fee, than the Doctor was to execute
his for nothing. Without making any further
Enquiry therefore into the Condition
of the Man, he immediately went up
Stairs. 
As soon as the Bailiff returned down
Stairs, which was immediately after he
had lodged the Doctor in the Room,
Booth had the Curiosity to ask him who
this Man was. ‘Why I don't know much
of him,’ said the Bailiff, ‘I had him once
in Custody before now, I remember it
was when your Honour was here last; 
and now I remember too, he said then
he knew your Honour very well. Indeed
I had some Opinion of him at that
Time; for he spent his Money very
much like a Gentleman; but I have
discovered since, that he is a poor Fellow,
and worth nothing. He is a mere
shy Cock. I have had the Stuff about
me this Week, and could never get at
him till this Morning; nay, I don't
believe we should ever have found out
his Lodgings, had it not been for the
Attorney that was here just now, who
gave us Information. And so we took 

him this Morning by a comical Way
enough. For we dressed up one of my
Men in Women's Cloaths, who told
the People of the House, that he was his
Sister just come to Town: for we were
told by the Attorney, that he had such
a Sister, upon which he was let up Stairs; 
and so kept the Door a jar till I and another
rush'd in. Let me tell you, Captain,
there are as good Stratagems made
Use of in our Business as any in the
Army.’ 
‘But pray, Sir, said Booth, did not
you tell me this Morning that the poor
Fellow was desperately wounded; nay,
I think you told the Doctor that he was
a dying Man?’ 
‘I had like to have forgot that, cries
the Bailiff. —Nothing would serve the
Gentleman but that he must make Resistance,
and he gave my Man a Blow
with a Stick; but I soon quieted him, by
giving him a Wipe or two with a
Hanger. Not that I believe I have done
his Business neither; but the Fellow is
faint-hearted, and the Surgeon I fancy
frightens him more than he need. — 
But however, let the worst come to the 

worst, the Law is all on my Side, and
it is only se fendendo. The Attorney that
was here just now told me so, and bid
me fear nothing: for that he would
stand my Friend, and undertake the
Cause; and he is a devilish good one at
a Defence at the Old Baily I promise you. 
I have known him bring off several that
every Body thought would have been
hang'd.’ 
‘But suppose you should be acquitted,
said Booth; would not the Blood of this
poor Wretch lie a little heavy at your
Heart?’ 
‘Why should it, Captain, said the
Bailiff. Is it not all done in a lawful
Way? Why will People resist the Law
when they know the Consequence? To
be sure, if a Man was to kill another in
an unlawful Manner as it were, and what
the Law calls Murder, that is quite and
clear another Thing. I should not care
to be convicted of Murder any more
than another Man. Why now, Captain,
you have been abroad in the Wars they
tell me, and to be sure must have killed
Men in your Time. Pray was you 

ever afraid afterwards of seeing their
Ghosts?’ 
‘That is a different Affair, cries Booth; 
but I would not kill a Man in cold Blood
for all the World.’ 
‘There is no Difference at all, as I can
see, cries the Bailiff. One is as much
in the Way of Business as the other. 
When Gentlemen behave themselves like
unto Gentlemen, I know how to treat
them as such as well as any Officer the
King hath. —And when they do not,
why they must take what follows, and
the Law doth not call it Murder.’ 
Booth very plainly saw that the Bailiff
had squared his Conscience exactly according
to Law, and that he could not
easily subvert his Way of Thinking. He
therefore gave up the Cause, and desir'd
the Bailiff to expedite the Bonds, which
he promised to do, saying, he hoped he
had used him with proper Civility this
Time if he had not the last, and that he
should be remember'd for it. 
But before we close this Chapter, we
shall endeavour to satisfy an Enquiry 

which may arise in our most favourite
Readers, (for so are the most curious)
how it came to pass that such a Person as
was Dr. Harrison should employ such a
Fellow as this Murphy. 
The Case then was thus. This Murphy
had been Clerk to an Attorney in the
the very same Town in which the Doctor
liv'd, and when he was out of his Time
had set up with a Character fair enough,
and had married a Maid Servant of Mrs.
Harris, by which Means he had all the
Business to which that Lady and her
Friends, in which Number was the Doctor,
could recommend him. 
Murphy went on with his Business; 
and thrived very well, 'till he happen'd
to make an unfortunate Slip, in which he
was detected by a Brother of the same
Calling. But tho' we call this by the
gentle Name of a Slip, in Respect to its
being so extremely common, it was a
Matter in which the Law if it had ever
come to its Ears would have passed a
very severe Censure, being indeed no
less than Perjury and Subornation of
Perjury. 

This Brother Attorney being a very
good-natur'd Man, and unwilling to bespatter
his own Profession, and considering
perhaps that the Consequence did in
no wise affect the Public, who had no
Manner of Interest in the Alternative,
whether A. in whom the Right was, or
B. to whom Mr. Murphy by the Means
aforesaid, had transferr'd it, succeeded in
an Action. We mention this Particular,
because as this Brother Attorney was a
very violent Party Man, and a professed
Stickler for the Public, to suffer any Injury
to have been done to that, would
have been highly inconsistent with his
Principles. 
This Gentleman therefore came to Mr.
Murphy, and after shewing him that he
had it in his Power to convict him of the
aforesaid Crime, very generously told him
that he had not the least Delight in bringing
any Man to Destruction, nor the least
Animosity against him. All that he insisted
upon was, that he would not live
in the same Town or County with one
who had been guilty of such an Action. 
He then told Mr. Murphy that he
would keep the Secret on two Conditions; 

the one was that he immediately quitted
that Country, the other was, that he
should convince him he deserved this
Kindness by his Gratitude, and that
Murphy should transfer to the other all the
Business which he then had in those Parts,
and to which he could possibly recommend
him. 
It is the Observation of a very wise
Man, that it is a very common Exercise
of Wisdom in this World, of two Evils
to chuse the least. The Reader therefore
cannot doubt but that Mr. Murphy
complied with the Alternative proposed
by his kind Brother, and accepted the
Terms on which Secrecy was to be obtain'd. 
This happen'd while the Doctor was
abroad, and with all this, except the
Departure of Murphy, not only the
Doctor, but the whole Town (save his
aforesaid Brother alone) were to this Day
unacquainted. 
The Doctor at his Return hearing that
Mr. Murphy was gone, applied to the
other Attorney in his Affairs, who still
employ'd this Murphy as his Agent in 

Town, partly perhaps out of Good-will
to him, and partly from the Recommendation
of Miss Harris; for as he had
married a Servant of the Family, and a
particular Favourite of her's, there can
be no wonder that she who was entirely
ignorant of the Affair above related, as
well as of his Conduct in Town, should
continue her Favour to him. It will appear
therefore, I apprehend, no longer
strange, that the Doctor who had seen
this Man but three Times since his Removal
to Town, and then conversed with
him only on Business, should remain as
ignorant of his Life and Character, as a
Man generally is of the Character of the
Hackney Coachman who drives him. Nor
doth it reflect more on the Honour or
Understanding of the Doctor under these
Circumstances to employ Murphy, than
it would if he had been driven about the
Town by a Thief or a Murderer. 



What passed between the Doctor and the sick
Man. 
We left the Doctor in the last Chapter
with the wounded Man, to
whom the Doctor in a very gentle Voice
spoke as follows: 

‘I am sorry, Friend, to see you in this
Situation, and am very ready to give
you any Comfort or Assistance within
my Power.’ 
‘I thank you kindly, Doctor, said the
Man. Indeed I should not have presumed
to have sent to you had I not
known your Character: for tho' I believe
I am not at all known to you,
I have lived many Years in that Town
where you yourself had a House: my
Name is Robinson. I used to ride for
the Attornies in those Parts, and I have
been employ'd on your Business in my
Time.’ 
‘I do not recollect you, nor your Name;’ 
said the Doctor, ‘but consider, Friend, your
Moments are precious, and your Business,
as I am inform'd, is to offer up your
Prayers to that Great Being, before
whom you are shortly to appear. — 
But first let me exhort you earnestly to a
most serious Repentance of all your Sins.’ 
‘O Doctor, said the Man—Pray, what
is your Opinion of a Death-bed Repentance?’ 

‘If Repentance is sincere, cries the
Doctor, I hope thorough the Mercies
and Merits of our most powerful and
benign Intercessor it will never come too
late.’ 
‘But do not you think, Sir, cries the
Man, that in order to obtain Forgiveness
of any great Sin we have committed
by an Injury done to our Neighbours,
it is necessary, as far as in us lies,
to make all the Amends we can to the
Party injur'd, and to undo if possible
the Injury we have done.’ 
‘Most undoubtedly, cries the Doctor,
our Pretence to Repentance would otherwise
be gross Hypocrisy, and an impudent
Attempt to deceive and impose
upon our Creator himself.’ 
‘Indeed I am of the same Opinion,
cries the Penitent; and I think further,
that this is thrown in my Way, and
hinted to me by that great Being: for
an Accident happened to me Yesterday,
by which, as Things have fallen out
since, I think I plainly discern the Hand
of Providence. I went Yesterday, Sir, 

you must know, to a Pawnbroker's, to
pawn the last Moveable, which, except
the poor Cloaths you see on my Back,
I am worth in the World. While I was
there, a young Lady came in to pawn
her Picture. She had disguised herself
so much, and pulled her Hood so over
her Face, that I did not know her while
she staid, which was scarce three Minutes. 
As soon as she was gone, the
Pawnbroker taking the Picture in his
Hand, cried out—Upon my Word this is
the handsomest Face I ever saw in my Life. 
I desired him to let me look on the Picture,
which he readily did—and I no
sooner cast my Eyes upon it, than the
strong Resemblance struck me, and I
knew it to be Mrs. Booth.’ 
‘Mrs. Booth! what Mrs. Booth?’ cries
the Doctor. 
‘Captain Booth's Lady, the Captain who
is now below,’ said the other. 
‘How!’ cries the Doctor with great
Impetuosity. 
‘Have Patience,’ said the Man, ‘and
you shall hear all. I expressed some 

Surprize to the Pawnbroker, and asked
the Lady's Name. He answered that he
knew not her Name, but that she was
some undone Wretch, who had the Day
before left all her Cloaths with him in
pawn. My Guilt immediately flew in
my Face, and told me I had been Accessary
to this Lady's Undoing. The
sudden Shock so affected me, that had
it not been for a Dram which the Pawnbroker
gave me, I believe I should have
sunk on the Spot.’ 
‘Accessary to her Undoing! How accessary?’ 
said the Doctor. ‘Pray tell
me, for I am impatient to hear.’ 
‘I will tell you all, as fast as I can,’ cries
the sick Man. ‘You know, good Doctor,
that Mrs. Harris of our Town had
two Daughters, this Mrs. Booth and another. 
Now, Sir, it seems the other
Daughter had, some Way or other, disobliged
her Mother, a little before the
old Lady died, therefore she made a
Will, and left all her Fortune, except
one thousand Pound, to Mrs. Booth; to
which Will Mr. Murphy, myself, and
another, who is now dead, were the Witnesses. 
Mrs. Harris afterwards died suddenly; 

upon which it was contrived,
by her other Daughter and Mr. Murphy
to make a new Will, in which
Mrs. Booth had a Legacy of 10l. and
all the rest was given to the other. To
this Will Murphy, myself, and the same
third Person, again set our Hands.’ 
‘Good Heaven! how wonderful is thy
Providence,’ cries the Doctor—‘Murphy
say you?’ 
‘He himself, Sir,’ answered Robinson; 
‘Murphy, who is the greatest Rogue I
believe now in the World.’ 
‘Pray, Sir, proceed,’ cries the Doctor. 
‘For this Service, Sir,’ said Robinson,
‘myself and the third Person, one Carter,
received 200l. each. What Reward
Murphy himself had, I know not. 
Carter died soon afterwards; and from
that Time, at several Payments, I have
by Threats extorted above 100l. more— 
And this, Sir, is the whole Truth, which
I am ready to testify, if it would please
Heaven to prolong my Life.—’ 

‘I hope it will,’ cries the Doctor; ‘but
something must be done for Fear of Accidents
—I will send to Council immediately,
to know how to secure your
Testimony. —Whom can I get to send? –– 
Stay, ay—he will do—but I know
not where his House or his Chambers are
—I will go myself—but I may be
wanted here.’ 
While the Doctor was in this violent
Agitation, the Surgeon made his Appearance. 
The Doctor stood still in a meditating
Posture, while the Surgeon examined
his Patient. After which the Doctor
begged him to declare his Opinion,
and whether he thought the wounded Man
in any immediate Danger of Death. ‘I
do not know,’ answered the Surgeon,
‘what you call immediate. He may
live several Days—nay he may
recover. It is impossible to give any
certain Opinion in these Cases.’ He then
launched forth into a Set of Terms, which
the Doctor, with all his Scholarship, could
not understand. To say the Truth, many
of them were not to be found in any Dictionary
or Lexicon. 

One Discovery however the Doctor
made, and that was, that the Surgeon was
a very ignorant, conceited Fellow, and
knew nothing of his Profession. He resolved
therefore to get better Advice for
the Sick; but this he postponed at present,
and applying himself to the Surgeon, said
he should be very much obliged to him,
if he knew where to find such a Counsellor,
and would fetch him thither. ‘I
should not ask such a Favour of you,
Sir,’ says the Doctor, ‘if it was not on
Business of the last Importance, or if I
could find any other Messenger.’ 
‘I fetch—Sir!’ said the Surgeon very
angrily. ‘Do you take me for a Footman,
or a Porter? I don't know who
you are; but I believe you are full as
proper to go on such an Errand as I
am;’ (for as the Doctor, who was just
come off his Journey, was very roughly
dressed, the Surgeon held him in no great
Respect.) The Surgeon then called aloud
from the Top of the Stairs, Let my Coachman
draw up, and strutted off without
any Ceremony, telling his Patient he would
call again the next Day. 

At this very Instant arrived Murphy
with the other Bail, and finding Booth alone,
he asked the Bailiff at the Door, what
was become of the Doctor. ‘Why the
Doctor,’ answer'd he, ‘is above Stairs,
praying with—’ ‘How!’ cries
Murphy. ‘How came you not to carry
him directly to Newgate, as you promised
me?’ ‘Why because he was wounded,’ 
cries the Bailiff. ‘I thought it
was Charity to take Care of him; and
besides, why should one make more
Noise about the Matter than is necessary.’ 
‘And Dr. Harrison with him?’ said
Murphy, ‘Yes, he is,’ said the Bailiff; 
‘he desired to speak with the Doctor very
much, and they have been praying together
almost this Hour.’ —‘All is up,
and undone,’ cries Murphy. ‘Let me
come by, I have thought of something
which I must do immediately.’ 
Now as by Means of the Surgeon's
leaving the Door open, the Doctor heard
Murphy's Voice naming Robinson peevishly,
he drew softly to the Top of the
Stairs, where he heard the foregoing Dialogue; 
and as soon as Murphy had uttered
his last Words, and was moving 

downwards, the Doctor immediately sallied
from his Post, running as fast as he
could, and crying stop the Villain, stop
the Thief. 
The Attorney wanted no better Hint to
accelerate his Pace; and having the Start
of the Doctor, got down Stairs, and out
into the Street; but the Doctor was so
close at his Heels, and being in Foot the
nimbler of the two, he soon overtook him,
and laid hold of him, as he would have
done on either Broughton or Slack in the
same Cause. 
This Action in the Street, accompanied
with the frequent Cry of stop Thief
by the Doctor, during the Chace, presently
drew together a large Mob, who
began, as is usual, to enter immediately
upon Business, and to make strict Enquiry
into the Matter, in order to proceed to do
Justice in their summary Way. 
Murphy, who knew well the Temper
of the Mob, cried out, ‘If you are a
Bailiff, shew me your Writ. Gentlemen,
he pretends to arrest me here without
a Writ.’ 

Upon this one of the sturdiest and forwardest
of the Mob, and who by a superior
Strength of Body, and of Lungs, presided
in this Assembly, declared he would
suffer no such Thing. ‘D&wblank;n me,’ says
he, ‘away to the Pump with the Catch-pole
directly—shew me your Writ,
or let the Gentleman go—you shall
not arrest a Man contrary to Law.’ 
He then laid his Hands on the Doctor,
who still fast griping the Attorney, cried
out: ‘He is a Villain—I am no Bailiff, but
a Clergyman, and this Lawyer is guilty
of Forgery, and hath ruined a poor
Family.’ 
‘How!’ cries the Spokesman—a
Lawyer!—that alters the Case—’ 
‘Yes, faith,’ cries another of the Mob,
‘it is Lawyer Murphy. I know him very
well.’ 
‘And hath he ruined a poor Family? 
Like enough, faith, if he's a Lawyer. — 
Away with him to the Justice immediately.’ 

The Bailiff now came up desiring to
know what was the Matter; to whom Doctor
Harrison answered, that he had arrested
that Villain for Forgery. ‘How can you
arrest him,’ cries the Bailiff, ‘you are
no Officer, nor have any Warrant? Mr.
Murphy is a Gentleman, and he shall
be used as such.’ 
‘Nay to be sure,’ cries the Spokesman,
‘there ought to be a Warrant; that's
the Truth on't.’ 
‘There needs no Warrant,’ cries the
Doctor. ‘I accuse him of Felony; and I
know so much of the Law of England,
that any Man may arrest a
Felon without any Warrant whatever. 
This Villain hath undone a poor Family; 
and I will die on the Spot before I part
with him.’ 
‘If the Law be so’ cries the Orator,
‘that is another Matter. And to be
sure, to ruin a poor Man is the greatest
of Sins. And being a Lawyer too,
makes it so much the worse—He shall
go before the Justice, d&wblank;n me if he 

shan't go before the Justice. I says the
Word he shall.’ 
‘I say he is a Gentleman, and shall be
used according to Law,’ cries the Bailiff. 
‘And though you are a Clergyman,’ said
he to Harrison, ‘you don't shew yourself
as one by your Actions.’ 
‘That's a Bailiff,’ cries one of the
Mob— ‘one Lawyer will always stand
by another; but I think the Clergyman
is a very good Man, and acts becoming
a Clergyman to stand by the Poor.’ 
At which Words the Mob all gave a
great Shout, and several cried out: ‘Bring
him along, away with him to the Justice.’ 
And now a Constable appeared, and
with an authoritative Voice declared what
he was, produced his Staff, and demanded
the Peace. 
The Doctor then delivered his Prisoner
over to the Officer, and charged him with
Felony; the Constable received him; the
Attorney submitted; the Bailiff was hushed; 
and the Waves of the Mob immediately
subsided. 

The Doctor now balanced with himself
how he should proceed; at last he determined
to leave Booth a little longer in Captivity,
and not to quit Sight of Murphy,
before he had lodged him safe with a Magistrate. 
They then all moved forwards
to the Justice; the Constable and his Prisoner
marching first, the Doctor and the
Bailiff following next, and about five
Thousand Mob, (for no less Number
were assembled in a very few Minutes)
following in the Procession. 
They found the Magistrate just sitting
down to his Dinner; however, when he
was acquainted with the Doctor's Profession,
he immediately admitted him, and
heard his Business. Which he no sooner
perfectly understood, with all its Circumstances,
than he resolved, tho' it was then
very late, and he had been fatigued all the
Morning with public Business, to postpone
all Refreshment 'till he had discharged his
Duty. He accordingly adjourned the Prisoner
and his Cause to the Bailiff's House,
whither he himself with the Doctor immediately
repaired, and whither the Attorney
was followed by a much larger Number 

of Attendants than he had been honoured
with before. 



In which the History draws towards a Conclusion. 
Nothing could exceed the Astonishment
of Booth at the Behaviour
of the Doctor, at the Time when he sallied
forth in Pursuit of the Attorney; for
which it was so impossible for him to account
in any Manner whatever. He remained
a long Time in the utmost Torture
of Mind, till at last the Bailiff's Wife
came to him, and asked him if the Doctor
was not a Mad-man; and in Truth he
could hardly defend him from that Imputation. 
While he was in this Perplexity, the
Maid of the House brought him a Message
from Robinson, desiring the Favour
of seeing him above Stairs. With this he
immediately complied. 
When these two were alone together,
and the Key turned on them (for the Bailiff's
Wife was a most careful Person, 

and never omitted that Ceremony in the
Absence of her Husband, having always
at her Tongue's End that excellent Proverb
of Safe bind, safe find.) Robinson
looking stedfastly upon Booth, said, ‘I
believe, Sir, you scarce remember me.’ 
Booth answered, that he thought he had
seen his Face somewhere before; but could
not then recollect when or where. 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ answered the Man, ‘it
was a Place which no Man can remember
with Pleasure. But do you not remember,
a few Weeks ago, that you had
the Misfortune to be in a certain Prison in
this Town, where you lost a trifling Sum
at Cards to a Fellow prisoner?’ 
This Hint sufficiently awakened Booth's
Memory, and he now recollected the
Features of his old Friend Robinson. He
answered him a little surlily, ‘I know you
now very well; but I did not imagine
you would ever have reminded me of
that Transaction.’ 
‘Alas, Sir!’ answered Robinson, ‘whatever
happened then was very trifling,
compared to the Injuries I have done you; 

but if my Life be spared long enough,
I will now undo it all; and as I have
been one of your worst Enemies, I will
now be one of your best Friends.’ 
He was just entering upon his Story,
when a Noise was heard below, which
might be almost compared to what hath
been heard in Holland, when the Dykes
have given Way, and the Ocean in an
Inundation breaks in upon the Land. It
seemed indeed as if the whole World was
bursting into the House at once. 
Booth was a Man of great Firmness of
Mind, and he had need of it all at this
Instant. As for poor Robinson, the usual
Concomitants of Guilt attended him, and
he began to tremble in a violent Manner. 
The first Person who ascended the Stairs
was the Doctor, who no sooner saw Booth
than he ran to him and embraced him,
crying, ‘My Child, I wish you Joy with
all my Heart. Your Sufferings are all
at an End; and Providence hath done
you the Justice at last, which it will one
Day or other render to all Men. —You
will hear all presently; but I can now 

only tell you, that your Sister is discovered,
and the Estate is your own.’ 
Booth was in such Confusion, that he
scarce made any Answer; and now appeared
the Justice and his Clerk, and immediately
afterwards the Constable with
his Prisoner, the Bailiff, and as many
more as could possibly crowd up Stairs. 
The Doctor now addressed himself to
the sick Man, and desired him to repeat
the same Information before the Justice
which he had made already; to which Robinson
readily consented. 
While the Clerk was taking down the
Information, the Attorney expressed a very
impatient Desire to send instantly for his
Clerk; and expressed so much Uneasiness
at the Confusion in which he had left his
Papers at home, that a Thought suggested
itself to the Doctor, that if his House was
searched, some Lights, and Evidence, relating
to this Affair, would certainly be
found; he therefore desired the Justice
to grant a Search-Warrant immediately,
to search his House. 

The Justice answered that he had no
such Power. That if there was any Suspicion
of stolen Goods, he could grant a
Warrant to search for them. 
‘How, Sir!’ said the Doctor, ‘can
you grant a Warrant to search a Man's
House for a silver Tea-spoon, and not
in a Case like this, where a Man is robbed
of his whole Estate?’ 
‘Hold, Sir,’ says the sick Man, ‘I
believe I can answer that Point; for I can
swear he hath several Title Deeds of the
Estate now in his Possession, which I am
sure were stolen from the right Owner.’ 
The Justice still hesitated. He said
Title Deeds savoured of the Realty, and
it was not Felony to steal them. If indeed
they were taken away in a Box, then it
would be Felony to steal the Box. 
‘Savour of the Realty! savour of the
Fartalty,’ said the Doctor, ‘I never heard
such incomprehensible Nonsense. This is
impudent, as well as childish trifling with
the Lives and Properties of Men.’ 

‘Well, Sir,’ said Robinson, ‘I now am
sure I can do his Business; for I know
he hath a silver Cup in his Possession,
which is the Property of this Gentleman,
(meaning Booth) and how he got it but
by Stealth, let him account if he can.’ 
‘That will do,’ cries the Justice with
great Pleasure. ‘That will do; and if
you will charge him on Oath with that,
I will instantly grant my Warrant to search
his House for it.’ ‘And I will go and see
it executed,’ cries the Doctor: For it was a
Maxim of his, that no Man could descend
below himself in doing any Act which may
contribute to protect an innocent Person,
or to bring a Rogue to the Gallows. 
‘The Oath was instantly taken, the Warrant
signed, and the Doctor attended the
Constable in the Execution of it.’ 
The Clerk then proceeded in taking
the Information of Robinson, and had
just finished it, when the Doctor returned
with the utmost Joy in his Countenance,
and declared that he had sufficient Evidence
of the Fact in his Possession. He
had indeed two or three Letters from Miss
Harris, in answer to the Attorney's frequent 

Demands of Money for Secrecy,
that fully explained the whole Villainy. 
The Justice now asked the Prisoner
what he had to say for himself, or whether
he chose to say any Thing in his own
Defence. 
‘Sir,’ said the Attorney with great
Confidence, ‘I am not to defend myself
here. It will be of no Service to me; 
for I know you neither can, nor will discharge
me. But I am extremely innocent
of all this Matter, as I doubt not
but to make appear to the Satisfaction
of a Court of Justice.’ 
The legal previous Ceremonies were
then gone through of binding over the
Prosecutor, &c. and then the Attorney
was committed to Newgate; whither he
was escorted amidst the Acclamations of
the Populace. 
When Murphy was departed, and a
little Calm restored in the House, the
Justice made his Compliments of Congratulation
to Booth; who, as well as he could
in his present Tumult of Joy, returned his
Thanks to both the Magistrate and the 

Doctor. They were now all preparing to
depart, when Mr. Bondum stept up to
Booth, and said: ‘Hold, Sir, you have
forgot one Thing—you have not given
Bail yet.’ 
This occasioned some Distress at this
Time; for the Attorney's Friend was departed; 
but when the Justice heard this,
he immediately offered himself as the other
Bondsman; and thus ended the Affair. 
It was now past Six o'Clock, and
none of the Gentlemen had yet dined. 
They very readily therefore accepted the
Magistrate's Invitation, and went all together
to his House. 
And now the very first Thing that was
done, even before they set down to Dinner,
was to dispatch a Messenger to one
of the best Surgeons in Town, to take Care
of Robinson; and another Messenger to
Booth's Lodgings, to prevent Amelia's Concern
at their staying so long. 
The latter however was to little Purpose; 
for Amelia's Patience had been worn
out before, and she had taken a Hackney-Coach,
and driven to the Bailiff's, where 

she arrived a little after the Departure of
her Husband, and was thence directed to
the Justice's. 
Though there was no kind of Reason
for Amelia's Fright at hearing that her
Husband and Doctor Harrison were gone
before the Justice; and though she indeed
imagined that they were there in the Light
of Complainants, not of Offenders; yet
so tender were her Fears for her Husband,
and so much had her gentle Spirits been
lately agitated, that she had a thousand
Apprehensions of she knew not what. 
When she arrived therefore at the House,
she ran directly into the Room, where all
the Company were at Dinner, scarce knowing
what she did, or whither she was going. 
She found her Husband in such a Situation,
and discovered such Chearfulness
in his Countenance, that so violent
a Turn was given to her Spirits, that she
was just able, with the Assistance of a Glass
of Water, to support herself. She soon
however recovered her Calmness, and in
a little Time began to eat what might indeed
be almost called her Breakfast. 

The Justice now wished her Joy of
what had happened that Day; for which
she kindly thanked him, apprehending he
meant the Liberty of her Husband. His
Worship might perhaps have explained
himself more largely, had not the Doctor
given him a timely Wink; for this wise
and good Man was fearful of making such
a Discovery all at once to Amelia, lest
it should overpower her; and luckily the
Justice's Wife was not well enough acquainted
with the Matter to say any thing
more on it than barely to assure the Lady
that she joined in her Husband's Congratulation. 
Amelia was then in a clean white Gown,
which she had that Day redeemed, and was
indeed dressed all over with great Neatness
and Exactness; with the Glow therefore
which arose in her Features from finding
her Husband released from his Captivity,
she made so charming a Figure, that she attracted
the Eyes of the Magistrate and of his
Wife, and they both agreed when they
were alone, that they had never seen so
charming a Creature; nay Booth himself
afterwards told her that he scarce ever remembered
her to look so extremely beautiful
as she did that Evening. 

Whether Amelia's Beauty, or the Reflexion
on the remarkable Act of Justice
he had performed, or whatever Motive
filled the Magistrate with extraordinary
good Humour, and opened his Heart and
Cellars, I will not determine; but he gave
them so hearty a Welcome, and they were
all so pleased with each other, that Amelia,
for that one Night, trusted the Care of
her Children to the Woman where they
lodged, nor did the Company rise from
Table till the Clock struck eleven. 
They then separated. Amelia and Booth
having been set down at their Lodgings
retired into each other's Arms; nor did
Booth that Evening, by the Doctor's Advice,
mention one Word of the grand Affair
to his Wife. 



Thus this History draws nearer to a Conclusion. 
In the Morning early Amelia received
the following Letter from Mrs. Atkinson. 

‘The Surgeon of the Regiment, to
which the Captain my Husband lately 

belonged, and who came this Evening
to see the Captain, hath almost
frightened me out of my Wits by a
strange Story of your Husband being
committed to Prison by a Justice of
Peace for Forgery. For Heaven's Sake
send me the Truth. If my Husband can be
of any Service, weak as he is, he will be
carried in a Chair to serve a Brother Officer
for whom he hath a Regard, which I
need not mention. Or if the Sum of
20l. will be of any Service to you, I will
wait upon you with it the Moment I
can get my Cloaths on, the Morning
you receive this; for it is too late to
send to Night. The Captain begs
his hearty Service and Respects, and believe
me,’ 
‘Dear Madam
Your ever affectionate Friend,
and humble Servant,
F. Atkinson.’ 
When Amelia read this Letter to Booth
they were both equally surprised, she at
the Commitment for Forgery, and he at
seeing such a Letter from Mrs. Atkinson; 
for he was a Stranger yet to the Reconciliation
that had happened. 

Booth's Doubts were first satisfied by
Amelia, from which he received great
Pleasure; for he really had a very great
Affection and Fondness for Mr. Atkinson,
who indeed so well deserved it. ‘Well,
my Dear,’ said he to Amelia smiling,
‘shall we accept this generous Offer?’ 
‘O fy! no certainly,’ answered she. 
‘Why not, cries Booth, it is but a Trifle; 
and yet it will be of great Service to us?’ 
‘But consider, my Dear,’ said she, ‘how
ill these poor People can spare it.’ 
‘They can spare it for a little while,’ said
Booth, ‘and we shall soon pay it them again?’ 
‘When, my Dear?’ said Amelia. ‘Do,
my dear Will, consider our wretched Circumstances. 
I beg you let us go into
the Country immediately, and live upon
Bread and Water, till Fortune pleases to
smile upon us.’ 
‘I am convinced that Day is not far
off,’ said Booth. ‘However, give me
Leave to send an Answer to Mrs. Atkinkinson,
that we shall be glad of her Company
immediately to Breakfast.’ 

‘You know I never contradict you,’ said
she, ‘but I assure you it is contrary to my
Inclinations to take this Money.’ 
‘Well, suffer me,’ cries he, ‘to act this
once contrary to your Inclinations.’ He
then writ a short Note to Mrs. Atkinson,
and dispatched it away immediately; which
when he had done, Amelia said, ‘I shall
be glad of Mrs. Atkinson's Company to
Breakfast; but yet I wish you would
oblige me in refusing this Money. Take
five Guineas only. That is indeed such
a Sum, as, if we never should pay it,
would sit light on my Mind. The
last Persons in the World from whom I
would receive Favours of that Sort, are
the poor and generous.’ 
‘You can receive Favours only from the
the Generous,’ cries Booth; ‘and, to be
plain with you, there are very few who
are generous that are not poor.’ 
‘What think you,’ said she, ‘of Dr.
Harrison?’ 
‘I do assure you,’ said Booth, ‘he is
far from being rich. The Doctor hath
an Income of little more than 600l. a 

Year; and I am convinced he gives away
four of it. Indeed he is one of the best
Oeconomists in the World; but yet I
am positive he never was at any Time
possessed of 500l. since he hath been a
Man. Consider, dear Emely, the late
Obligations we have to this Gentleman,
it would be unreasonable to expect more,
at least at present; my Half-pay is mortgaged
for a Year to come. —How then
shall we live?’ 
‘By our Labour,’ answered she, ‘I am
able to labour, and I am sure I am not
ashamed of it.’ 
‘And do you really think you can support
such a Life?’ 
‘I am sure I could be happy in it,’ answered
Amelia. ‘And why not I as well
as a thousand others, who have not the
Happiness of such a Husband to make
Life delicious? Why should I complain
of my hard Fate, while so many, who
are much poorer than I, enjoy theirs. 
Am I of a superior Rank of Being to
the Wife of the honest Labourer? Am
I not Partaker of one common Nature
with her?’ 

‘My Angel,’ cries Booth, ‘it delights
me to hear you talk thus, and for a Reason
you little guess; for I am assured that
one who can so heroically endure Adversity,
will bear Prosperity with equal
Greatness of Soul; for the Mind that
cannot be dejected by the former, is not
likely to be transported with the latter.’ 
‘If it had pleased Heaven’, cried she,
‘to have tried me, I think, at least I hope
I should have preserved my Humility.’ 
‘Then, my Dear,’ said he, ‘I will relate
you a Dream I had last Night. You
know you lately mentioned a Dream of
yours.’ 
‘Do so, said she, I am attentive.’ 
‘I dreamt, said he, this Night that we
were in the most miserable Situation
imaginable. Indeed in the Situation we
were Yesterday Morning, or rather
worse, that I was laid in a Prison for
Debt, and that you wanted a Morsel of
Bread to feed the Mouths of your hungry
Children. At length (for nothing
you know is quicker than the Transition
in Dreams) Dr. Harrison methought 

came to me, with Chearfulness and Joy
in his Countenance. The Prison Doors
immediately flew open; and Dr. Harrison
introduced you, gayly tho' not richly
dressed. That you gently chid me for
staying so long; all on a sudden appear'd
a Coach with four Horses to it, in which
was a Maid Servant with our two Children. 
We both immediately went into
the Coach, and taking our Leave of the
Doctor, set out towards your Country
House: for yours I dreamt it was. — 
I only ask you now if this was real, and
the Transition almost as sudden, could
you support it?—’ 
Amelia was going to answer when Mrs.
Atkinson came into the Room, and after
very little previous Ceremony presented
Booth with a Bank Note, which he received
of her, saying, he would very soon repay
it; a Promise that a little offended Amelia,
as she thought he had no Chance of keeping
it. 
The Doctor presently arrived, and the
Company sat down to Breakfast, during
which Mrs. Atkinson entertained them with
the History of the Doctors that had attended
her Husband, and with many vast Eulogiums 

on him who came last, by
whose Advice Atkinson was recovered
from every thing but the Weakness which
his Distemper had occasioned. 
When the Tea-Table was removed,
Booth told the Doctor that he had acquainted
his Wife with a Dream he had last
Night. ‘I dreamt, Doctor, said he, that
she was restored to her Estate.’ 
‘Very well, said the Doctor; and if I
am to be the Oniropolos, I believe the
Dream will come to pass. To say the
Truth, I have rather a better Opinion of
Dreams than Horace had. Old Homer
says they came from Jupiter; and as to
your Dream, I have often had it in my
waking Thoughts, that some time or
other that Roguery (for so I was always
convinced it was) would be brought to
Light: For the same Homer says, as
you, Madam, (meaning Mrs. Atkinson)
very well know,’ 
&grE;&gria;&grp;&gre;&grr; &grg;&graa;&grr; &grt;&gre; &grk;&gra;&grig; &gra;&grus;&grt;&gria;&grk;&grap; &GROs;&grl;&grua;&grm;&grp;&gri;&gro;&grst; &gro;&grus;&grk; &gres;&grt;&grea;&grl;&gre;&grs;&grs;&gre;&grn;, 
&GREsa;&grk; &grt;&gre; &grk;&gra;&grig; &gros;&gry;&greg; &grt;&gre;&grl;&gre;&gric;: &grs;&grua;&grn; &grt;&gre; &grm;&gre;&grg;&graa;&grl;&grwi; &gras;&grp;&grea;&grt;&gri;&grs;&gra;&grn; 
&grS;&grug;&grn; &grs;&grf;&grhic;&grs;&gri;&grn; &grk;&gre;&grf;&gra;&grl;&grhic;&grs;&gri;, &grg;&gru;&grn;&gra;&gri;&grx;&gria; &grt;&gre; &grk;&gra;&grig; &grt;&gre;&grk;&grea;&gre;&grs;&grs;&gri;&grn;* . 

I have no Greek Ears, Sir, said Mrs.
Atkinson. ‘I believe I could understand
it in the Delphin Homer.’ 
‘I wish, cries he, my dear Child, (to
Amelia) you would read a little in the
Delphin Aristotle, or else in some Christian
Divine, to learn a Doctrine which you
will one Day have a Use for, I mean to
bear the hardest of all human Conflicts,
and support with an even Temper and
without any violent Transports of Mind,
a sudden Gust of Prosperity.’ 
Indeed, cries Amelia, ‘I should almost
think my Husband and you, Doctor, had
some very good News to tell me, by
your using, both of you, the same Introduction. 
As far as I know myself, I
think I can answer, I can support any
Degree of Prosperity, and I think I
yesterday shew'd I could: For I do
assure you, it is not in the Power of
Fortune to try me with such another
Transition from Grief to Joy, as I conceived
from seeing my Husband in Prison
and at Liberty.’ 

‘Well, you are a good Girl,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘and after I have put on my
Spectacles I will try you.’ 
The Doctor then took out a News Paper,
and read as follows. 
‘Yesterday one Murphy, an eminent
Attorney at Law, was committed to
Newgate, for the Forgery of a Will
under which an Estate hath been for many
Years detain'd from the right Owner.’ 
Now in this Paragraph there is something
very remarkable, and that is— 
that it is true: but opus est explanatum. In
the Delphin Edition of this News Paper,
there is the following Note upon the
Words Right Owner. ‘The Right Owner
of this Estate is a young Lady of the
highest Merit, whose Maiden Name was
Harris, and who some Time since was
married to an idle Fellow, one Lieutenant
Booth. And the best Historians
assure us, that Letters from the elder
Sister of this Lady, which manifestly
prove the Forgery, and clear up the
whole Affair, are in the Hands of an
old Parson, call'd Dr. Harrison.’ 

‘And is this really true, cries Amelia?’ 
‘Yes, really, and sincerely, cries the
Doctor. The whole Estate: for your
Mother left it you all, and is as surely
yours, as if you was already in Possession.’ 
‘Gracious Heaven, cries she, falling
on her Knees, I thank you.’ —And
then starting up, she ran to her Husband,
and embracing him, cried, ‘My dear
Love, I wish you Joy: and I ought
in Gratitude to wish it you: for you are
the Cause of mine. It is upon yours,
and my Children's Account, that I principally
rejoice.’ 
Mrs. Atkinson rose from her Chair, and
jumped about the Room for Joy, repeating, 

Tume quod optanti Divûm promittere Nemo
Auderet, volvenda Dies, en, attulit ultro* .
Amelia now threw herself into a Chair,
complain'd she was a little faint, and 

begg'd a Glass of Water. The Doctor
advis'd her to be blooded; but she refused,
saying she requir'd a Vent of another
Kind. —She then desir'd her
Children to be brought to her, whom
she immediately caught in her Arms, and
having profusely cried over them for several
Minutes, declar'd she was easy. 
After which she soon regain'd her usual
Temper and Complexion. 
That Day they din'd together, and in
the Afternoon they all, except the Doctor,
visited Captain Atkinson; he repair'd
to the Bailiff's House to visit the sick Man,
whom he found very chearful, the Surgeon
having assur'd him that he was in no
Danger. 
The Doctor had a long Spiritual Discourse
with Robinson, who assur'd him
that he sincerely repented of his past Life,
that he was resolv'd to lead his future Days
in a different Manner, and to make what
Amends he could for his Sins to the Society
by bringing one of the greatest
Rogues in it to Justice. There was a Circumstance
which much pleased the Doctor,
and made him conclude that, however Robinson
had been corrupted by his old Master,
he had naturally a good Disposition. 
This was, that Robinson declared he was
chiefly induced to the Discovery by what 

had happened at the Pawnbroker's, and
by the Miseries which he there perceived
he had been instrumental in bringing on
Booth and his Family. 
The next Day Booth and his Wife, at
the Doctor's Instance, din'd with Colonel
James and his Lady, where they were
receiv'd with great Civility, and all Matters
were accommodated, without Booth
ever knowing a Syllable of the Challenge
even to this Day. 
The Doctor insisted very strongly on
having Miss Harris taken into Custody,
and said, if she was his Sister, he would
deliver her to Justice. He added besides,
that it was impossible to skreen her, and
carry on the Prosecution, or indeed recover
the Estate. Amelia at last begg'd
the Delay of one Day only, in which
Time she wrote a Letter to her Sister informing
her of the Discovery and the
Danger in which she stood, and begg'd
her earnestly to make her Escape, with
many Assurances that she would never
suffer her to know any Distress. This
Letter she sent away Express, and it had
the desir'd Effect: for Miss Harris having
receiv'd sufficient Information from the
Attorney to the same Purpose, immediately
set out for Pool, and from thence to
France, carrying with her all her Money, 

most of her Cloaths, and some few Jewels. 
She had indeed pack'd up Plate and Jewels
to the Value of 2000l. and upwards. 
But Booth to whom Amelia communicated
the Letter, prevented her, by ordering
the Man that went with the Express, (who
had been a Serjeant of the Foot Guards
recommended to him by Atkinson) to suffer
the Lady to go whither she pleased, but not to
take any Thing with her except her Cloaths,
which he was carefully to search. These
Orders were obey'd punctually, and with
these she was oblig'd to comply. 
Two Days after the Bird was flown, a
Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice arriv'd
to take her up, the Messenger of
which return'd with the News of her
Flight, highly to the Satisfaction of Amelia,
and consequently of Booth, and indeed
not greatly to the Grief of the Doctor. 
About a Week afterwards Booth and
Amelia, with their Children, and Captain
Atkinson and his Lady, all set forwards
together for Amelia's House, where they
arriv'd amidst the Acclamations of all the
Neighbours, and every public Demonstration
of Joy. 
They found the House ready prepar'd
to receive them by Atkinson's Friend, the
old Serjeant, and a good Dinner prepar'd
for them by Amelia's old Nurse, who was 

addressed with the utmost Duty by her Son
and Daughter, most affectionately caress'd
by Booth and his Wife, and by Amelia's
absolute Command seated next to herself
at the Table. At which perhaps were
assembled some of the best and happiest
People then in the World. 



In which the History is concluded. 
Having brought our History to a
Conclusion, as to those Points in
which we presume our Reader was chiefly
interested, in the foregoing Chapter; we
shall in this, by way of Epilogue, endeavour
to satisfy his Curiosity, as to what
hath since happened to the principal Personages
of whom we have treated in the
foregoing Pages. 
Colonel James and his Lady, after living
in a polite Manner for many Years
together, at last agreed to live in as polite
a Manner asunder. The Colonel hath kept
Miss Mathews ever since, and is at length
grown to doat on her (though now very
disagreeable in her Person, and immensely
fat) to such a Degree, that he submits to
be treated by her in the most tyrannical
Manner. 

He allows his Lady 800l. a Year, with
which she divides her Time between Tunbridge,
Bath and London, and passes about
nine Hours in the twenty-four at Cards. 
Her Income is lately increased by 3000l.
left her by her Brother Colonel Bath, who
was killed in a Duel about six Years ago,
by a Gentleman who told the Colonel he
differed from him in Opinion. 
The noble Peer and Mrs. Ellison have
been both dead several Years, and both
of the Consequences of their favourite Vices; 
Mrs. Ellison having fallen a Martyr to her
Liquor, and the other to his Amours, by
which he was at last become so rotten, that
he stunk above Ground. 
The Attorney, Murphy, was brought to
his Trial at the Old-Bailey, where, after
much quibbling about the Meaning of a
very plain Act of Parliament, he was at
length convicted of Forgery, and was
soon afterwards hanged at Tyburn. 
The Witness for some Time seemed to
reform his Life, and received a small Pension
from Booth; after which he returned
to vicious Courses, took a Purse on the
Highway, was detected and taken, and 

followed the last Steps of his old Master. 
So apt are Men, whose Manners have been
once thoroughly corrupted, to return,
from any Dawn of an Amendment, into
the dark Paths of Vice. 
As to Miss Harris, she lived three Years
with a broken Heart at Boulogne, where
she received annually fifty Pounds from
her Sister, who was hardly prevailed on
by Dr. Harrison not to send her a Hundred,
and then died in a most miserable
Manner. 
Mr. Atkinson upon the whole hath led
a very happy Life with his Wife, though
he hath been sometimes obliged to pay
proper Homage to her superior Understanding
and Knowledge. This, however,
he chearfully submits to, and she makes
him proper Returns of Fondness. They
have two fine Boys, of whom they are
equally fond. He is lately advanced to
the Rank of Captain, and last Summer
both he and his Wife paid a Visit of three
Months to Booth and his Wife. 
Dr. Harrison is grown old in Years, and
in Honour; beloved and respected by all
his Parishioners, and by all his Neighbours. 
He divides his Time between his
Parish, his old Town, and Booth's—at
which last Place he had, two Years ago, a
gentle Fit of the Gout, being the first Attack 

of that Distemper. During this Fit
Amelia was his Nurse, and her two oldest
Daughters sat up alternately with him for
a whole Week. The Eldest of those
Girls, whose Name is Amelia, is his Favourite; 
she is the Picture of her Mother,
and it is thought the Doctor hath distinguished
her in his Will; for he hath declared
that he will leave his whole Fortune,
except some few Charities, among Amelia's
Children. 
As to Booth and Amelia, Fortune seems
to have made them large Amends for the
Tricks she played them in their Youth. 
They have, ever since the above Period of this
History, enjoyed an uninterrupted Course
of Health and Happiness. In about six
Weeks after Booth's first coming into the
Country, he went to London, and paid all
his Debts of Honour; after which, and a
Stay of two Days only, he returned into
the Country, and hath never since been
thirty Miles from home. He hath two
Boys and four Girls; the eldest of the
Boys; he, who hath made his Appearance
in this History, is just come from the University,
and is one of the finest Gentlemen,
and best Scholars of his Age. The
second is just going from School, and is
intended for the Church, that being his 

own Choice. His eldest Daughter is a
Woman grown, but we must not mention
her Age. A Marriage was proposed to
her the other Day with a young Fellow
of a good Estate, but she never would see
him more than once; ‘for Dr. Harrison,
says she, ‘told me he was illiterate, and
I am sure he is ill natured.’ The second
Girl is three Years younger than her
Sister, and the others are yet Children. 
If Booth hath lately had any Misfortune, it
was that one of these younger Children had,
for two Years, a violent Humour, which she
contracted from her Nurse; but she was
last Summer perfectly cured by the Glastonbury
Waters. 
Amelia is still the finest Woman in
England of her Age. Booth himself often
avers she is as handsome as ever. Nothing
can equal the Serenity of their Lives. 
Amelia declared to me the other Day, that
she did not remember to have seen her
Husband out of Humour these ten Years; 
and upon my insinuating to her, that he
had the best of Wives, she answered with
a Smile, that she ought to be so, for that
he had made her the happiest of Women. 