




Of Divisions in Authors. 
There are certain Mysteries
or Secrets in all Trades from
the highest to the lowest, from
that of Prime Ministring to
this of Authoring, which are seldom discovered,
unless to Members of the same
Calling. Among those used by us Gentlemen 

of the latter Occupation, I take
this of dividing our Works into Books
and Chapters to be none of the least considerable. 
Now for want of being truly
acquainted with this Secret, common Readers
imagine, that by this Art of dividing,
we mean only to swell our Works
to a much larger Bulk than they would
otherwise be extended to. These several
Places therefore in our Paper, which are
filled with our Books and Chapters, are
understood as so much Buckram, Stays,
and Stay-tape in a Taylor's Bill, serving
only to make up the Sum Total, commonly
found at the Bottom of our first
Page, and of his last. 
But in reality the Case is otherwise,
and in this, as well as all other Instances,
we consult the Advantage of our Reader,
and not our own; and indeed many notable
Uses arise to him from this Method:
for first, those little Spaces between
our Chapters may be looked upon as an
Inn or Resting-Place, where he may stop
and take a Glass, or any other Refreshment,
as it pleases him. Nay, our fine
Readers will, perhaps, be scarce able to
travel farther than through one of them
in a Day. As to those vacant Pages which
are placed between our Books, they are 

to be regarded as those Stages, where, in
long Journeys, the Traveller stays some
time to repose himself, and consider of
what he hath seen in the Parts he hath already
past through; a Consideration which
I take the Liberty to recommend a little to
the Reader: for however swift his Capacity
may be, I would not advise him to travel
through these Pages too fast: for if he
doth, he may probably miss the seeing
some curious Productions of Nature which
will be observed by the slower and more
accurate Reader. A Volume without any
such Places of Rest resembles the Opening
of Wilds or Seas, which tires the Eye
and fatigues the Spirit when entered upon. 
Secondly, What are the Contents prefixed
to every Chapter, but so many Inscriptions
over the Gates of Inns (to continue
the same Metaphor,) informing
the Reader what Entertainment he is to
expect, which if he likes not, he may travel
on to the next: for in Biography, as we
are not tied down to an exact Concatenation
equally with other Historians; so a
Chapter or two (for Instance this I am
now writing) may be often pass'd over
without any Injury to the Whole. And in
these Inscriptions I have been as faithful
as possible, not imitating the celebrated 

Montagne, who promises you one thing
and gives you another; nor some Title-Page
Authors, who promise a great deal,
and produce nothing at all. 
There are, besides these more obvious
Benefits, several others which our Readers
enjoy from this Art of dividing; 
tho' perhaps most of them too mysterious
to be presently understood, by any who are
not initiated into the Science of Authoring. 
These have the Sanction of great
Antiquity. Homer not only divided his great
Work into twenty-four Books, (in Compliment
perhaps to the twenty-four Letters
to which he had very particular Obligations)
but hawked them all separately,
delivering only one Book at a Time, (probably
by Subscription). He was the first
Inventor of the Art which so long lay dormant,
of publishing by Numbers, an Art
now brought to such Perfection, that even
Dictionaries are divided and exhibited
piece-meal to the Public; nay, one Bookseller
hath (to encourage Learning and ease
the Public) contrived to give them a
Dictionary in this divided Manner for only
fifteen Shillings more than it would have
cost entire. 

Virgil hath given us his Poem in
twelve Books, an Argument of his Modesty; 
for by that doubtless he would insinuate
that he pretends to no more than
half the Merit of the Greek: for the same
Reason, our Milton went originally no farther
than ten; 'till being puffed up by the
Praise of his Friends, he put himself on the
same footing with the Roman Poet. 
I Shall not however enter so deep into
this Matter as some very learned Criticks
have done; who have with infinite Labour
and acute Discernment discovered
what Books are proper for Embellishment,
and what require Simplicity only, particularly
with regard to Similies, which I
think are now generally agreed to become
any Book but the first. 
I will dismiss this Chapter with the
following Observation: That it becomes an
Author generally to divide a Book, as it
doth a Butcher to joint his Meat, for such
Assistance is of great Help to both the
Reader and the Carver. And now having
indulged myself a little, I will endeavour
to indulge the Curiosity of my Reader,
who is no doubt impatient to know what 

he will find in the subsequent Chapters of
this Book. 



A surprizing Instance of Mr. Adams's
short Memory, with the unfortunate
Consequences which it brought on
Joseph. 
Mr. Adams and Joseph were now
ready to depart, when an Accident
determined the former to return,
which Tow-wouse, Barnabas, and the
Bookseller had not been able to do. This
Accident was no other than the forgetting
to put up the Sermons, which were indeed
left behind; what he had mistaken for
them in the Saddle-Bags being no other
than three Shirts, a pair of Shoes, and
some other Necessaries, which Mrs. Adams,
who thought her Husband would
want Shirts more than Sermons on his
Journey, had carefully provided him. 
The Bill was now called for, and on
Examination, amounted within a Shilling
to the Sum which Mr. Adams had in his
Pocket. Perhaps the Reader may wonder 

how he was able to produce a sufficient Sum
for so many Days: that he may not be
too much surprized, therefore, it cannot be
unnecessary to acquaint him, that he had
borrowed a Guinea of a Servant belonging
to the Coach and Six, who had been formerly
one of his Parishioners, and whose
Master, the Owner of the Coach, then
lived within three Miles of him: for so
good was the Credit of Mr. Adams, that
even Mr. Peter the Lady Booby's Steward,
would have lent him a Guinea with very
little Security. 
Mr. Adams discharged the Bill, and
they were both setting out, having agreed
to ride and tie: a Method of Travelling
much used by two Persons who have but
one Horse between them, and is thus performed. 
The two Travellers set out together,
one on horseback, the other on foot: 
Now as it generally happens that he on
horseback out-goes him on foot, the
Custom is, that when he arrives at the
Distance agreed on, he is to dismount, tie
the Horse to some Gate, Tree, Post, or
other thing, and then proceed on foot; 
when the other comes up to the Horse, he
unties him, mounts and gallops on, 'till
having passed by his Fellow-Traveller, he
likewise arrives at the Place of tying. And 

this is that Method of Travelling so much
in use among our prudent Ancestors, who
knew that Horses had Mouths as well as
Legs, and that they could not use the
latter, without being at the Expence of
suffering the Beasts themselves to use the
former. This was the Method in use in
those Days: when, instead of a Coach and
Six, a Member of Parliament's Lady used
to mount a Pillion behind her Husband; 
and a grave Serjeant at Law condescended
to amble to Westminster on an easy Pad,
with his Clerk kicking his Heels behind
him. 
Adams was now gone some Minutes,
having insisted on Joseph's beginning the
Journey on horseback, and Joseph had
his Foot in the Stirrup, when the Hostler
presented him a Bill for the Horse's Board
during his Residence at the Inn. Joseph
said Mr. Adams had paid all; but this
Matter being referred to Mr. Tow-wouse
was by him decided in favour of the Hostler,
and indeed with Truth and Justice:
for this was a fresh Instance of that shortness
of Memory which did not arise from
want of Parts, but that continual Hurry
in which Parson Adams was always involved. 

Joseph was now reduced to a Dilemma
which extremely puzzled him. The Sum
due for Horse-meat was twelve Shillings,
(for Adams who had borrowed the Beast,
had ordered him to be fed as well as they
could feed him) and the Cash in his Pocket
amounted to Sixpence, (for Adams had divided
the last Shilling with him). Now,
tho' there have been some ingenious Persons
who have contrived to pay twelve
Shillings with Sixpence, Joseph was not
one of them. He had never contracted a
Debt in his Life, and was consequently the
less ready at an Expedient to extricate
himself. Tow-wouse would probably have
been willing to give him Credit 'till next
time, had not Joseph, when he honestly
discovered the Nakedness of his Pockets,
pulled out that little Piece of Gold which
we have mentioned before. This caused
Mr. Tow-wouse's Eyes to water, and he
told Joseph, he did not conceive a Man
could want Money whilst he had Gold in
his Pocket. Joseph answered, he had such
a Value for that little Piece of Gold, that
he would not part with it for a hundred
times the Riches which the greatest Esquire
in the County was worth. A pretty Way
indeed, said Mr. Tow-wouse to run in
debt, and then refuse to part with your 

Money, because you have a Value for it. 
I never knew any Piece of Gold of more
Value than as many Shillings as it would
change for. Not to preserve my Life from
starving, nor to redeem it from a Robber,
would I part with this dear Piece, answered
Joseph. Then I cannot part with the Horse,
replied Tow-wouse. A Resolution highly
commended by a Lawyer then in the Yard,
who declared Mr. Tow-wouse might justify
the Detainer. 
As we cannot therefore at present get
Mr. Joseph out of the Inn, we shall leave
him in it, and carry our Reader on after
Parson Adams, who, his Mind being perfectly
at ease, fell into a Contemplation on a Passage
in Æschylus, which entertained him
for three Miles together, without suffering
him once to reflect on his Fellow-Traveller. 
At length having spun out this Thread,
and being now at the Summit of a Hill,
he cast his Eyes backwards, and wondered
that he could not see any sign of Joseph. 
As he left him ready to mount the Horse,
he could not apprehend any Mischief had
happened, neither could he suspect that he
had miss'd his Way, it being so broad and
plain: the only Reason which presented itself 

to him, was that he had met with an
Acquaintance who had prevailed with him
to delay some time in Discourse. 
He therefore resolved to proceed slowly
forwards, not doubting but that he should
be shortly overtaken, and soon came to a
large Water, which filling the whole Road,
he saw no Method of passing unless by
wading through, which he accordingly did
up to his Middle; but was no sooner got
to the other Side, than he perceived, if he
had looked over the Hedge, he would have
found a Foot-Path capable of conducting
him without wetting his Shoes. 
His Surprize at Joseph's not coming
up grew now very troublesome: he began
to fear he knew not what, and as he
determined, to move no farther; and, if he
did not shortly overtake him, to return
back; he wished to find a House of publick
Entertainment where he might have dried
his Clothes and refresh himself with a Pint:
but seeing no such (for no other Reason
than because he did not cast his Eyes a
hundred Yards forwards) he sat himself
down on a Stile, and pulled out his
Æschylus. 

A Fellow passing presently by, Adams
asked him, if he could direct him to an
Alehouse. The Fellow who had just left it,
and perceived the House and Sign to be
within sight, thinking he had jeered him,
and being of a morose Temper, bid him
follow his Nose and be d&wblank;n'd. Adams
told him he was a saucy Jackanapes; upon
which the Fellow turned about angrily:
but perceiving Adams clench his Fist he
thought proper to go on without taking
any farther notice. 
A Horseman following immediately after,
and being asked the same Question,
answered, Friend, there is one within a
Stone's-Throw; I believe you may see it
before you. Adams lifting up his Eyes,
cry'd, I protest and so there is; and thanking
his Informer proceeded directly to it. 




The Opinion of two Lawyers concerning
the same Gentleman, with Mr.
Adams's Enquiry into the Religion of
his Host. 
He had just entered the House, had
called for his Pint and seated himself,
when two Horsemen came to the
Door, and fastening their Horses to the
Rails, alighted. They said there was a
violent Shower of Rain coming on, which
they intended to weather there, and went
into a little Room by themselves, not perceiving
Mr. Adams. 
One of these immediately asked the
other, if he had seen a more comical Adventure
a great while? Upon which the
other said, “he doubted whether by Law,
the Landlord could justify detaining the
Horse for his Corn and Hay.” But the
first answered, “undoubtedly he can: it is
an adjudged Case, and I have known it
tried.” 
Adams, who tho' he was, as the Reader
may suspect, a little inclined to Forgetfulness, 

never wanted more than a Hint
to remind him, over-hearing their Discourse,
immediately suggested to himself that this
was his own Horse, and that he had forgot
to pay for him, which upon enquiry,
he was certified of by the Gentlemen; who
added, that the Horse was likely to have
more Rest than Food, unless he was paid
for. 
The poor Parson resolved to return presently
to the Inn, tho' he knew no more
than Joseph, how to procure his Horse his
Liberty: he was however prevailed on to
stay under Covert, 'till the Shower which
was now very violent, was over. 
The three Travellers now sat down together
over a Mug of good Beer; when
Adams, who had observed a Gentleman's
Horse as he passed along the Road, enquired
to whom it belonged: one of the
Horsemen had no sooner mentioned the
Owner's Name, than the other began to
revile him in the most opprobrious Terms. 
The English Language scarce affords a single
reproachful Word, which he did not
vent on this Occasion. He charged him
likewise with many particular Facts. He
said,—“he no more regarded a Field of
Wheat when he was hunting, than he 

did the High-way; that he had injured
several poor Farmers by trampling their
Corn under his Horse's Heels; and if any
of them begged him with the utmost
Submission to refrain, his Horse-whip
was always ready to do them justice.” 
He said, “that he was the greatest Tyrant
to the Neighbours in every other Instance,
and would not suffer a Farmer to keep a
Gun, tho' he might justify it by Law; 
and in his own Family so cruel a Master,
that he never kept a Servant a Twelve-month. 
In his Capacity as a Justice,” 
continued he, “he behaves so partially,
that he commits or acquits just as he is
in the humour, without any regard to
Truth or Evidence: The Devil may carry
any one before him for me; I would rather
be tried before some Judges than
be a Prosecutor before him: If I had an
Estate in the Neighbourhood, I would
sell it for half the Value, rather than live
near him.” Adams shook his Head, and
said, “he was sorry such Men were suffered
to proceed with Impunity, and
that Riches could set any Man above
Law.” The Reviler a little after retiring
into the Yard, the Gentleman, who had
first mentioned his Name to Adams, began
to assure him, “that his Companion
was a prejudiced Person. It is true,” says 

he, “perhaps, that he may have sometimes
pursued his Game over a Field of Corn,
but he hath always made the Party ample
Satisfaction; that so far from tyrannizing
over his Neighbours, or taking away
their Guns, he himself knew several Farmers
not qualified, who not only kept
Guns, but killed Game with them. That
he was the best of Masters to his Servants,
and several of them had grown
old in his Service. That he was the best
Justice of Peace in the Kingdom, and to
his certain knowledge had decided many
difficult Points, which were referred
to him, with the greatest Equity, and the
highest Wisdom. And he verily believed,
several Persons would give a
Year's Purchase more for an Estate near
him, than under the Wings of any other
great Man.” He had just finished his
Encomium, when his Companion returned
and acquainted him the Storm was over. 
Upon which, they presently mounted their
Horses and departed. 
Adams, who was in the utmost Anxiety
at those different Characters of the same
Person, asked his Host if he knew the
Gentleman: for he began to imagine they
had by mistake been speaking of two several
Gentlemen.” “No, no, Master!” 

answered the Host, a shrewd cunning Fellow,
“I know the Gentleman very well
of whom they have been speaking, as I
do the Gentleman who spoke of him.
As for riding over other Men's Corn, to
my knowledge he hath not been on
horseback these two Years. I never
heard he did any Injury of that kind; 
and as to making Reparation, he is not
so free of his Money as that comes to
neither. Nor did I ever hear of his taking
away any Man's Gun; nay, I know
several who have Guns in their Houses:
but as for killing Game with them, no
Man is stricter; and I believe he would
ruin any who did. You heard one of
the Gentlemen say, he was the worst
Master in the World, and the other that
he is the best: but as for my own part, I
know all his Servants, and never heard
from any of them that he was either one
or the other.—” “Aye, aye,” says
Adams, “and how doth he behave as a
Justice, pray?” “Faith, Friend,” answered
the Host, “I question whether he
is in the Commission: the only Cause
I have heard he hath decided a great
while, was one between those very two
Persons who just went out of this House; 
and I am sure he determined that justly,
for I heard the whole matter.” “Which 

did he decide it in favour of,” quoth
Adams? “I think I need not answer that
Question,” cried the Host, “after the
different Characters you have heard of
him. It is not my Business to contradict
Gentlemen, while they are drinking in
my House: but I knew neither of them
spoke a Syllable of Truth.” “God
forbid!” (said Adams,) “that Men
should arrive at such a Pitch of
Wickedness, to be-lye the Character of
their Neighbour from a little private
Affection, or what is infinitely worse, a
private Spite. I rather believe we have
mistaken them, and they mean two other
Persons: for there are many Houses on
the Road.” “Why prithee, Friend,” 
cries the Host, “dost thou pretend never
to have told a lye in thy Life?” “Never
a malicious one, I am certain,” answered
Adams; “nor with a Design to injure
the Reputation of any Man living.” 
“Pugh, malicious! no, no,” replied the
Host; “not malicious with a Design to
hang a Man, or bring him into Trouble:
but surely out of love to one's self, one
must speak better of a Friend than an
Enemy.” “Out of love to your self,
you should confine yourself to Truth,” 
says Adams, “for by doing otherwise, you
injure the noblest Part of yourself, your 

immortal Soul. I can hardly believe
any Man such an Idiot to risque the Loss
of that by any trifling Gain, and the
greatest Gain in this World is but Dirt
in comparison of what shall be revealed
hereafter.” Upon which the Host taking
up the Cup, with a Smile drank a
Health to Hereafter: adding, “he was
for something present.” “Why,” says
Adams very gravely, “Do not you believe
another World?” To which the
Host answered, “yes, he was no Atheist.” 
“And you believe you have an immortal
Soul,” cries Adams: He answered, ‘God
forbid he should not.” “And Heaven
and Hell?” said the Parson. The Host
then bid him “not to prophane: for those
were Things not to be mentioned nor
thought of but in Church.” Adams
asked him, “why he went to Church, if
what he learned there had no Influence
on his Conduct in Life?” “I go to
Church,” answered the Host, “to say
my Prayers and behave godly.” “And
dost not thou,” cry'd Adams, “believe
what thou hearest at Church?” “Most
part of it, Master,” returned the Host. 
“And dost not thou then tremble,” cries
Adams, “at the Thought of eternal Punishment?” 
“As for that, Master,” 
said he, “I never once thought about it: 

but what signifies talking about matters
so far off? the Mug is out, shall I draw
another? 
Whilst he was gone for that purpose,
a Stage-Coach drove up to the Door. 
The Coachman coming into the House,
was asked by the Mistress, whom he had
in his Coach? A Parcel of Squinny-gut
B&wblank;s, (says he) I have a good mind to
overturn them; you won't prevail upon
them to drink any thing I assure you. 
Adams asked him, if he had not seen a
young Man on Horse-back on the Road,
(describing Joseph). Aye, said the Coachman,
a Gentlewoman in my Coach that
is his Acquaintance redeemed him and
his Horse; he would have been here before
this time, had not the Storm driven
him to shelter. God bless her, said Adams
in a Rapture; nor could he delay walking
out to satisfy himself who this charitable
Woman was; but what was his surprize,
when he saw his old Acquaintance, Madam
Slipslop? Her's indeed was not so great,
because she had been informed by Joseph,
that he was on the Road. Very civil were
the Salutations on both sides; and Mrs.
Slipslop rebuked the Hostess for denying the
Gentleman to be there when she asked for
him: but indeed the poor Woman had not 

erred designedly; for Mrs. Slipslop asked
for a Clergyman; and she had unhappily
mistaken him for a Person travelling to a
neighbouring Fair with the Thimble and
Button, or some other such Operation:
for he marched in a swinging great white
Coat with black Buttons, a short Wig,
and a Hat, which so far from having a
black Hatband, had nothing black about
it. 
Joseph was now come up, and Mrs.
Slipslop would have had him quit his Horse
to the Parson, and come himself into the
Coach: but he absolutely refused, saying
he thanked Heaven he was well enough recovered
to be very able to ride, and added,
he hoped he knew his Duty better than to
ride in a Coach while Mr. Adams was on
horseback. 
Mrs. Slipslop would have persisted
longer, had not a Lady in the Coach put
a short End to the Dispute, by refusing to
suffer a Fellow in a Livery to ride in the
same Coach with herself: so it was at
length agreed that Adams should fill the
vacant Place in the Coach, and Joseph
should proceed on horseback. 

They had not proceeded far before
Mrs. Slipslop, addressing herself to the Parson,
spoke thus: “There hath been a
strange Alteration in our Family, Mr.
Adams, since Sir John's Death.” “A
strange Alteration indeed!” says Adams,
“as I gather from some Hints
which have dropped from Joseph.” 
“Aye,” says she, “I could never have believed
it, but the longer one lives in the
World, the more one sees. So Joseph
hath given you Hints.” —“But of what
Nature, will always remain a perfect Secret
with me,” cries the Parson; “he
forced me to promise before he would
communicate any thing. “They are no
Secrets to me, I assure you,” cries Slipslop; 
“and I believe, they will none any
where shortly: for ever since his Departure
she hath behaved more like a
mad Woman than any thing else.” 
“Truly, I am heartily concerned,” says
Adams, “for she was a good sort of a
Lady; indeed I have often wished she
had attended a little more constantly at
the Service, but she hath done a great
deal of Good in the Parish.” “O Mr.
Adams!” says Slipslop, “People that
don't see all, often know nothing. 
“Many Things have been given away in
our Family, I do assure you, without 

her knowledge. I have heard you say
in the Pulpit, we ought not to brag:
but indeed I can't avoid saying, if she
had kept the Keys herself, the Poor
would have wanted many a Cordial
which I have let them have. As for
my late Master, he was as worthy a
Man as ever lived, and would have done
infinite Good if he had not been controlled:
but he loved a quiet Life, Heavens
rest his Soul! I am confident he is
there, and enjoys a quiet Life, which
some Folks would not allow him here.” 
Adams answered, “he had never heard
this before, and was mistaken, if she herself,” 
(for he remembered she used to
commend her Master and blame her Mistress,)
“had not formerly been of another
Opinion.” “I don't know,” (replied
she,) “what I might once think: but
now I am confidous Matters are as I tell
you: The World will shortly see who
hath been deceived; for my part I say
nothing, but that it is wondersome how
some People can carry all things with
a grave Face.” 
Thus Mr. Adams and she discoursed:
'till they came opposite to a great House
which stood at some distance from the
Road; a Lady in the Coach spying it, 

cry'd yonder lives the unfortunate Leonora,
if one can call a Woman justly unfortunate,
whom we must own at the same time guilty,
and the Author of her own Calamity. 
This was abundantly sufficient to awaken
the Curiosity of Mr. Adams, as indeed it
did that of the whole Company, who jointly
solicited the Lady to acquaint them with Leonora's
History, since it seemed, by what she
had said, to contain something remarkable. 
The Lady, who was perfectly well bred,
did not require many Entreaties, and having
only wished this Entertainment might
make amends for the Company's Attention,
she began in the following manner. 



The History of Leonora, or the Unfortunate
Jilt. 
Leonora was the Daughter of a
Gentleman of Fortune; she was tall
and well-shaped, with a Sprightliness in
her Countenance, which often attracts
beyond the more regular Features joined
with an insipid Air; nor is this kind of
Beauty less apt to deceive than allure the 

Good-Humour which it indicates, being
often mistaken for Good-Nature, and the
Vivacity for true Understanding. 
Leonora was now at the Age of Eighteen,
lived with an Aunt of her's in a Town
in the North of England. She was an extreme
Lover of Gaiety, and very rarely
missed a Ball or any other publick Assembly; 
where she had frequent Opportunities
of satisfying a greedy Appetite of Vanity
with the Preference which was given
her by the Men to almost every other
Woman present. 
Among many young Fellows who
were particular in their Gallantries towards
her, Horatio soon distinguished
himself in her Eyes beyond all his Competitors; 
she danced with more than ordinary
Gaiety when he happened to be her Partner; 
neither the Fairness of the Evening
nor the Musick of the Nightingale, could
lengthen her Walk like his Company. She
affected no longer to understand the Civilities
of others: whilst she inclined so attentive
an Ear to every Compliment of
Horatio, that she often smiled even when
it was too delicate for her Comprehension. 

“Pray, Madam,” says Adams, “who
was this Squire Horatio?” 
Horatio, says the Lady, was a young
Gentleman of a good Family, bred to the
Law, and had been some few Years called to
the Degree of a Barrister. His Face and
Person were such as the Generality allowed
handsome: but he had a Dignity in his
Air very rarely to be seen. His Temper
was of the saturnine Complexion, but without
the least Taint of Moroseness. He had
Wit and Humour with an Inclination to Satire,
which he indulged rather too much. 
This Gentleman, who had contracted
the most violent Passion for Leonora, was
the last Person who perceived the Probability
of its Success. The whole Town had
made the Match for him, before he himself
had drawn a Confidence from her Actions
sufficient to mention his Passion to
her; for it was his Opinion, (and perhaps
he was there in the right) that it is highly
impolitick to talk seriously of Love to a
Woman before you have made such a Progress
in her Affections, that she herself expects
and desires to hear it. 

But whatever Diffidence the Fears of
a Lover may create, which are apt to
magnify every Favour conferred on a Rival,
and to see the little Advances towards
themselves through the other End of the
Perspective; it was impossible that Horatio's
Passion should so blind his Discernment,
as to prevent his conceiving Hopes
from the Behaviour of Leonora; whose
Fondness for him was now as visible to an
indifferent Person in their Company, as his
for her. 
“I Never knew any of these forward
Sluts come to good,” (says the Lady,
who refused Joseph's Entrance into the
Coach,) “nor shall I wonder at any thing
she doth in the Sequel.” 
The Lady proceeded in her Story thus: 
It was in the Midst of a gay Conversation
in the Walks one Evening, when Horatio
whispered Leonora, “that he was desirous
to take a Turn or two with her in private; 
for that he had something to
communicate to her of great Consequence.” 
“Are you sure it is of Consequence?” 
said she, smiling. —“I
hope,” answered he, “you will think 

so too, since the whole future Happiness
of my Life must depend on the Event.” 
Leonora, who very much suspected
what was coming, would have deferred it
'till another Time: but Horatio, who had
more than half conquered the Difficulty
of speaking by the first Motion, was so
very importunate, that she at last yielded,
and leaving the rest of the Company, they
turned aside into an unfrequented Walk. 
They had retired far out of the sight
of the Company, both maintaining a strict
Silence. At last Horatio made a full Stop,
and taking Leonora, who stood pale and
trembling, gently by the Hand, he fetched
a deep Sigh, and then looking on her
Eyes with all the Tenderness imaginable,
he cried out in a faltering Accent; “O
Leonora! it is necessary for me to declare
to you on what the future Happiness
of my Life must be founded! Must
I say, there is something belonging to you
which is a Bar to my Happiness, and
which unless you will part with, I must
be miserable?” “What can that be,” 
replied Leonora? —“No wonder,” said
he, “you are surprized, that I should
make an Objection to any thing which
is yours, yet sure you may guess, since 

it is the only one which the Riches of the
World, if they were mine, should purchase
of me. —O it is that which you must
part with, to bestow all the rest! Can
Leonora, or rather will she doubt
longer? —Let me then whisper it in
her Ears, It is your Name, Madam. 
It is by parting with that, by your Condescension
to be for ever mine, which must
at once prevent me from being the most
miserable, and will render me the happiest
of Mankind.” Leonora, covered
with Blushes, and with as angry a Look
as she could possibly put on, told him,
that had she suspected what his Declaration
would have been, he should not have
decoyed her from her Company; that
he had so surprized and frighted her,
that she begged him to convey her back
as quick as possible;” which he, trembling
very near as much as herself, did. 
“More Fool he,” cried Slipslop, “it
is a sign he knew very little of our
Sect.” “Truly, Madam,” said Adams,
“I think you are in the right, I should
have insisted to know a piece of her
Mind, when I had carried matters so
far.” But Mrs. Grave-airs desired the
Lady to omit all such fulsome Stuff in her
Story: for that it made her sick. 

Well then, Madam, to be as concise
as possible, said the Lady, many Weeks
had not past after this Interview, before
Horatio and Leonora were what they call
on a good footing together. All Ceremonies
except the last were now over; 
the Writings were now drawn, and every
thing was in the utmost forwardness preparative
to the putting Horatio in possession
of all his Wishes. I will if you please
repeat you a Letter from each of them
which I have got by heart, and which
will give you no small Idea of their Passion
on both sides. 
Mrs. Grave-airs objected to hearing
these Letters: but being put to the Vote,
it was carried against her by all the rest in
the Coach; Parson Adams contending for
it with the utmost Vehemence. 

Horatio to Leonora.
How vain, most adorable Creature,
is the Pursuit of Pleasure in the absence
of an Object to which the Mind is
entirely devoted, unless it have some Relation
to that Object! I was last Night,
condemned to the Society of Men of Wit
and Learning, which, however agreeable, 

it might have formerly been to me, now
only gave me a Suspicion that they imputed
my Absence in Conversation to the true
Cause. For which Reason, when your
Engagements forbid me the extatic Happiness
of seeing you, I am always desirous
to be alone; since my Sentiments for Leonora
are so delicate, that I cannot bear
the Apprehension of another's prying into
those delightful Endearments with which
the warm Imagination of a Lover will
sometimes indulge him, and which I suspect
my Eyes then betray. To fear this
Discovery of our Thoughts, may perhaps
appear too ridiculous a Nicety to Minds,
not susceptible of all the Tendernesses of
a Passion which requires every human
Virtue to exert itself in its full Extent. 
Since the Beloved whose Happiness it ultimately
respects, may give us charming
Opportunities of being brave in her Defence,
generous to her Wants, compassionate
to her Afflictions, grateful to her
Kindness, and, in the same manner, of exercising
every other Virtue, which he who
would not do to any Degree, and that with
the utmost Rapture, can never deserve the
Name of a Lover: It is therefore with a
View to the delicate Modesty of your
Mind that I cultivate it so purely in my
own, and it is that which will sufficiently 

suggest to you the Uneasiness I bear from
those Liberties which Men to whom the
World allow Politeness will sometimes give
themselves on these Occasions. 
Can I tell you with what Eagerness I
expect the Arrival of that blest Day, when
I shall experience the Falshood of a common
Assertion that the greatest human
Happiness consists in Hope? A Doctrine
which no Person had ever stronger Reason
to believe than myself at present, since
none ever tasted such Bliss as fires my
Bosom with the Thoughts of spending
my future Days with such a Companion,
and that every Action of my Life will have
the glorious Satisfaction of conducing to
your Happiness. 

Leonora to Horatio.
The Refinement of your Mind has
been so evidently proved, by every
Word and Action ever since I had first
the Pleasure of knowing you, that I thought
it impossible my good Opinion of Horatio
could have been heightened by any additional
Proof of Merit. This very Thought
was my Amusement when I received your
last Letter, which, when I opened, I confess
I was surprized to find the delicate 

Sentiments expressed there, so far exceeded
what I thought could come even from you,
(altho' I know all the generous Principles
human Nature is capable of, are centered
in your Breast) that Words cannot paint
what I feel on the Reflection, that my
Happiness shall be the ultimate End of
all your Actions. 
Oh Horatio! what a Life must that be,
where the meanest domestick Cares are
sweetened by the pleasing Consideration that
the Man on Earth who best deserves, and
to whom you are most inclined to give
your Affections, is to reap either Profit or
Pleasure from all you do! In such a Case,
Toils must be turned into Diversions, and
nothing but the unavoidable Inconveniences
of Life can make us remember that
we are mortal. 
If the solitary Turn of your Thoughts,
and the Desire of keeping them undiscovered,
makes even the Conversation of
Men of Wit and Learning tedious to you,
what anxious Hours must I spend who
am condemn'd by Custom to the Conversation
of Women, whose natural Curiosity
leads them to pry into all my Thoughts,
and whose Envy can never suffer Horatio's
Heart to be possessed by any one without 

forcing them into malicious Designs, against
the Person who is so happy as to
possess it: but indeed, if ever Envy can
possible have any Excuse, or even Alleviation,
it is in this Case, where the Good is
so great, that it must be equally natural
to all to wish it for themselves, nor am
I ashamed to own it: and to your Merit,
Horatio, I am obliged, that prevents my
being in that most uneasy of all the Situations. 
I can figure in my Imagination of
being led by Inclination to love the Person
whom my own Judgment forces me to
condemn. 
Matters were in so great forwardness
between this fond Couple, that the
Day was fixed for their Marriage, and was
now within a Fortnight, when the Sessions
chanced to be held for that County in a
Town about twenty Miles distance from
that which is the Scene of our Story. It
seems, it is usual for the young Gentlemen
of the Bar to repair to these Sessions, not
so much for the sake of Profit, as to shew
their Parts and learn the Law of the Justices
of Peace: for which purpose one of
the wisest and gravest of all the Justices
is appointed Speaker or Chairman, as they
modestly call it, and he reads them a Lecture, 

and instructs them in the true Knowledge
of the Law. 
“You are her guilty of a little Mistake,
says Adams, which if you please I will
correct; I have attended at one of these
Quarter Sessions, where I observed the
Counsel taught the Justices, instead of
learning any thing of them”. 
It is not very material, said the Lady:
hither repaired Horatio, who as he hoped
by his Profession to advance his Fortune,
which was not at present very large, for
the sake of his dear Leonora, he resolved
to spare no Pains, nor lose any Opportunity
of improving or advancing himself
in it. 
The same Afternoon in which he left
the Town, as Leonora stood at her Window,
a Coach and Six passed by: which
she declared to be the completest, genteelest,
prettiest Equipage she ever saw; 
adding these remarkable Words, O I am
in love with that Equipage! which, tho'
her Friend Howella at that time did not
greatly regard, she hath since remembered. 

In the Evening an Assembly was held,
which Leonora honoured with her Company:
but intended to pay her dear Horatio
the Compliment of refusing to dance
in his Absence. 
O Why have not Women as good Resolution
to maintain their Vows, as they
have often good Inclinations in making
them! 
The Gentleman who owned the Coach
and Six, came to the Assembly. His
Clothes were as remarkably fine as his Equipage
could be. He soon attracted the
Eyes of the Company, all the Smarts, all
the Silk Waistcoats with Silver and Gold
Edgings, were eclipsed in an instant. 
Madam, said Adams, if it be not impertinent,
I should be glad to know how
this Gentleman was drest. 
Sir, answered the Lady, I have been
told, he had on a Cut-Velvet Coat of a
Cinnamon Colour, lined with a Pink Satten,
embroidered all over with Gold; his
Waistcoat, which was Cloth of Silver, was
embroidered with Gold likewise. I cannot
be particular as to the rest of his Dress: 

but it was all in the French Fashion, for
Bellarmine, (that was his Name) was just
arrived from Paris. 
This fine Figure did not more entirely
engage the Eyes of every Lady in the
Assembly, than Leonora did his. He had
scarce beheld her, but he stood motionless
and fixed as a Statue, or at least would have
done so, if Good-Breeding had permitted
him. However, he carried it so far before
he had power to correct himself, that
every Person in the Room easily discovered
where his Admiration was settled. 
The other Ladies began to single out their
former Partners, all perceiving who would
be Bellarmine's Choice; which they however
endeavoured, by all possible means, to
prevent: Many of them saying to her,
“O Madam, I suppose we shan't have
the pleasure of seeing you dance To-Night;” 
and then crying out in Bellarmine's
hearing, “O Leonora will not dance,
I assure you; her Partner is not here.” 
One maliciously attempted to prevent her,
by sending a disagreeable Fellow to ask her,
that so she might be obliged either to
dance with him, or sit down: but this
Scheme proved abortive. 

Leonora saw herself admired by the
fine Stranger, and envied by every Woman
present. Her little Heart began to
flutter within her, and her Head was agitated
with a convulsive Motion; she seemed
as if she would speak to several of her
Acquaintance, but had nothing to say:
for as she would not mention her present
Triumph, so she could not disengage her
Thoughts one moment from the Contemplation
of it: She had never tasted any thing
like this Happiness. She had before known
what it was to torment a single Woman; 
but to be hated and secretly cursed by a
whole Assembly, was a Joy reserved for this
blessed Moment. As this vast Profusion
of Ecstasy had awaked her Understanding,
so there was nothing so foolish as her Behaviour; 
she played a thousand childest
Tricks, distorted her Person into several
Shapes, and her Face into several Laughs,
without any Reason. In a word, her Carriage
was as absurd as her Desires, which
were to affect an Insensibility of the Stranger's
Admiration, and at the same time
a Triumph from that Admiration over
every Woman in the Room. 
In this Temper of Mind, Bellarmine,
having enquired who she was, advanced 

to her, and with a low Bow, begged the
Honour of dancing with her, which she
with as low a Curt'sy immediately granted. 
She danced with him all Night, and enjoyed
perhaps the highest Pleasure, which
she was capable of feeling. 
At these Words, Adams fetched a deep
Groan, which frighted the Ladies, who
told him, “they hoped he was not ill.” 
He answered, “he groaned only for the
Folly of Leonora.” 
Leonora retired, (continued the Lady)
about Six in the Morning, but not
to Rest. She tumbled and tossed in her
Bed, with very short Intervals of Sleep,
and those entirely filled with Dreams of
the Equigage and fine Clothes she had
seen, and the Balls, Operas and Ridotto's,
which had been the Subject of their
Conversation. 
In the Afternoon Bellarmine, in the dear
Coach and Six, came to wait on her. He
was indeed charmed with her Person, and
was, on Enquiry, so well pleased with
the Circumstances of her Father, (for he
himself, notwithstanding all this Finery,
was not quite so rich as a Cræsus or an
Att&abar;lus. ) “Att&ashort;lus,  says Mr. Adams, but 

pray how came you acquained with these
Names?” The Lady smiled at the Question,
and proceeded—He was so pleased, I
say, that he resolved to make his Addresses
to her directly. He did so accordingly,
and that with so much warmth aud briskness,
that he quickly baffled her weak Repulses,
and obliged the Lady to refer him
to her Father, who, she knew, would quickly
declare in favour of a Coach and Six. 
Thus, what Horatio had by Sighs and
Tears, Love and Tenderness, been so
long obtaining, the French-English Bellarmine
with Gaiety and Gallantry possessed
himself of in an instant. In other
words, what Modesty had employed a full
Year in raising, Impudence demolished in
24 Hours. 
Here Adams groaned a second time,
but the Ladies, who began to smoke him,
took no Notice. 
From the Opening of the Assembly 'till
the End of Bellarmine's Visit, Leonora had
scarce once Thought of Horatio: but he
now began, tho' an unwelcome Guest, to
enter into her Mind. She wished she had
seen the charming Bellarmine and his
charming Equipage before Matters had 

gone so far. “Yet, why” (says she) “should
I wish to have seen him before, or what
signifies it that I have seen him now? Is
not Horatio my Lover? almost my Husband? 
Is he not as handsome, nay handsomer
than Bellarmine? Aye, but Bellarmine
is the genteeler and the finer
Man; yes, that he must be allowed. 
Yes, yes, he is that certainly. But
did not I no longer ago than yesterday
love Horatio more than all the World?
aye, but yesterday I had not seen Bellarmine. 
But doth not Horatio doat on
me, and may he not in despair break
his Heart if I abandon him? Well, and
hath not Bellarmine a Heart to break too? 
Yes, but I promised Horatio first; but
that was poor Bellarmine's Misfortune,
if I had seen him first, I should certainly
have preferred him. Did not the dear
Creature prefer me to every Woman in
the Assembly, when every she was laying
out for him? When was it in Horatio's
power to give me such an Instance of
Affection? Can he give me an Equipage
or any of those Things which Bellarmine
will make me Mistress of? How
vast is the Difference between being the
Wife of a poor Counsellor, and the
Wife of one of Bellarmine's Fortune! 
But can I suffer Horatio to die? for he 

hath sworn he cannot survive my Loss:
but perhaps he may not die; if he should,
can I prevent it? Must I sacrifice my
self to him? besides, Bellarmine may be
as miserable for me too.” She was thus
arguing with herself, when some young
Ladies called her to the Walks, and a
little relieved her Anxiety for the present. 
The next Morning Bellarmine breakfasted
with her in presence of her Aunt,
whom he sufficiently informed of his Passion
for Leonora; he was no sooner withdrawn,
than the old Lady began to advise
her Niece on this Occasion. —“You
see, Child,” (says she) “what Fortune
hath thrown in your way, and I hope
you will not withstand your own Preferments.” 
Leonora sighing, “begged her
not to mention any such thing, when she
knew her Engagements to Horatio.” 
“Engagements to a Fig,” cry'd the Aunt,
you should thank Heaven on your Knees
that you have it yet in your power to
break them. Will any Woman hesitate
a Moment, whether she shall ride in a
Coach or walk on Foot all the Days of
her Life? —But Bellarmine drives six,
and Horatio not even a Pair.” “Yes,
but, Madam, what will the World say?” 

answered Leonora; “will not they condemn
me?” The World is always on
the side of Prudence,” cries the Aunt,
and would surely condemn you if you
sacrificed your Interest to any Motive
whatever. O, I know the World very
well, and you shew your own Ignorance,
my Dear, by your Objection. 
O' my Conscience the World is wiser. 
I have lived longer in it than you, and I
assure you there is not any thing worth
our Regard besides Money: nor did I
ever know one Person who married from
other Considerations, who did not afterwards
heartily repent it. Besides, if we
examine the two Men, can you prefer a
sneaking Fellow, who hath been bred at
a University, to a fine Gentleman just
come from his Travels? —All the World
must allow Bellarmine to be a fine Gentleman,
positively a fine Gentleman, and
a handsome Man.—” “Perhaps, Madam,
I should not doubt, if I knew how
to be handsomely off with the other.” 
O leave that to me,” says the Aunt. 
You know your Father hath not been
acquainted with the Affair. Indeed, for
my part, I thought it might do well enough,
not dreaming of such an Offer:
but I'll disengage you, leave me to give 

the Fellow an Answer. I warrant you,
he shall give you no farther Trouble.” 
Leonora was at length satisfied with
her Aunt's Reasoning; and Bellarmine supping
with her that Evening, it was agreed
he should the next Morning go to her Father
and propose the Match, which she
consented should be consummated at his
Return. 
The Aunt retired soon after Supper,
and the Lovers being left together, Bellarmine
begun in the following manner:
“Yes, Madam, this Coat I assure you
was made at Paris, and I defy the best
English Taylor even to imitate it. There
is not one of them can cut, Madam, they
can't cut. If you observe how this Skirt
is turned, and this Sleeve, a clumsy
English Rascal can do nothing like it. — 
“Pray how do you like my Liveries?” 
Leonora answered, “she thought them
very pretty.” “All French,” says he,
“I assure you, except their Great Coats; 
I never trust any thing more than a Great
Coat to an Englishman; you know one
must encourage our own People what
one can, he, he, he! but for myself, I
would see the dirty Island at the bottom
of the Sea, rather than wear a single 

Rag of English Work about me, and
I am sure after you have made one Tour
to Paris, you will be of the same Opinion
with regard to your own Clothes. 
You can't conceive what an Addition
a French Dress would be to your Beauty; 
I positively assure you, at the first Opera
I saw since I came over, I mistook the
English Ladies for Chambermaids, he,
he, he!” 
With such sort of polite Discourse did
the gay Bellarmine entertain his beloved
Leonora; when the Door opened on a sudden,
and Horatio entered the Room; 'tis
impossible to express the Surprize of Leonora. 
“Poor Woman,” says Mrs. Slipslop,
what a terrible Quandary she must be in!” 
“Not at all,” says Miss Grave-airs, “such
Sluts can never be confounded.” 
A Long Silence, continued the Lady,
prevailed in the whole Company: If the
familiar Entrance of Horatio struck the
greatest Astonishment into Bellarmine,
the unexpected Presence of Bellarmine no
less surprized Horatio. At length Leonora
collecting all the Spirits she was Mistress of,
addressed herself to the latter, and pretended 

to wonder at the Reason of so late a Visit. 
“I should, indeed,” answered he, “have
made some Apology for disturbing you
at this Hour, had not my finding you
in Company assured me I do not break
in on your Repose.” Bellarmine rose
from his Chair, traversed the Room in a
Minuet Step, and humm'd an Opera Tune,
while Horatio advancing to Leonora ask'd
her in a Whisper, if that Gentleman was
not a Relation of her's; to which she answered
with a Smile, or rather Sneer, “No,
he is no Relation of mine yet;” adding,
she could not guess the Meaning of his
Question.” Horatio told her softly, “it
did not arise from Jealousy.” “Jealousy!” 
cries she, “I assure you;—it would
be very strange in a common Acquaintance
to give himself any of those Airs.” 
These Words a little surprized Horatio,
but before he had time to answer, Bellarmine
danced up to the Lady, and told her,
“he feared he interrupted some Business
between her and the Gentleman.” “I
can have no Business,” said she, “with
the Gentleman, nor any other, which
need be any Secret to you.” 
“You'll pardon me,” said Horatio,
if I desire to know who this Gentleman
is, who is to be intrusted with all our 

Secrets” “You'll know soon enough,” 
cries Leonora, “but I can't guess what
Secrets can ever pass between us of such
mighty Consequence.” “No Madam!” 
cries Horatio, “I'm sure you would not
have me understand you in earnest.” 
It's indifferent to me,” says she, “how
you understand me; but I think so unseasonable
a Visit as difficult to be understood
at all, at least when People
find one engaged, though one's Servants
do not deny one, one may expect a well-bred
Person should soon take the Hint.” 
“Madam,” said Horatio, “I did not imagine
any Engagement with a Stranger,
as it seems this Gentleman is, would have
made my Visit impertinent, or that any
such Ceremonies were to be preserved
between Persons in our Situation.” “Sure
you are in a Dream,” says she, “or
would persuade me that I am in one. 
I know no pretensions a common Acquaintance
can have to lay aside the Ceremonies
of Good-Breeding.” “Sure,” 
said he, “I am in a Dream; for it is impossible
I should be really esteemed a
common Acquaintance by Leonora, after
what has passed between us!” 
Passed between us! Do you intend to
affront me before this Gentleman? 

d&wblank;n me, affront the Lady,” says
Bellarmine, cocking his Hat and strutting
up to Horatio, “does any Man dare affront
this Lady before me, d&wblank;n me?” 
Harkee, “Sir,” says Horatio, “I would
advise you to lay aside that fierce Air; for
I am mightily deceived, if this Lady has
not a violent Desire to get your Worship
a good drubbing.” “Sir,” said
Bellarmine, “I have the Honour to be her
Protector, and d&wblank;n me, if I understand
your Meaning.” “Sir,” answered
Horatio, “she is rather your Protectress:
but give yourself no more Airs, for you
see I am prepared for you,” (shaking his
Whip at him) “Oh! Serviteur tres humble,” 
says Bellarmine, “Je Vous entend
parfaitement bien.” At which time the
Aunt, who had heard of Horatio's Visit,
entered the Room and soon satisfied all his
Doubts. She convinced him that he was
never more awake in his Life, and that
nothing more extraordinary had happened
in his three days Absence, than a small
Alteration in the Affections of Leonora:
who now burst into Tears, and wondered
what Reason she had given him to use her
in so barbarous a Manner. Horatio desired
Bellarmine to withdraw with him: but
the Ladies prevented it by laying violent
Hands on the latter; upon which, the 

former took his Leave without any great
Ceremony, and departed, leaving the Lady
with his Rival to consult for his Safety,
which Leonora feared her Indiscretion
might have endangered: but the Aunt
comforted her with Assurances, that Horatio
would not venture his Person against
so accomplished a Cavalier as Bellarmine,
and that being a Lawyer, he
would seek Revenge in his own way, and
the most they had to apprehend from him
was an Action. 
They at length therefore agreed to permit
Bellarmine to retire to his Lodgings, having
first settled all Matters relating to the Journey
which he was to undertake in the
Morning, and their Preparations for the
Nuptials at his return. 
But alas! as wife Men have observed,
the Seat of Valour is not the Countenance,
and many a grave and plain Man, will, on
a just Provocation, betake himself to that
mischievous Metal, cold Iron; while Men
of a fiercer Brow, and sometimes with that
Emblem of Courage, a Cockade, will more
prudently decline it. 
Leonora was waked in the Morning,
from a Visionary Coach and Six, with the 

dismal Account, that Bellarmine was run
through the Body by Horatio, that he lay
languishing at an Inn, and the Surgeons
had declared the Wound mortal. She immediately
leap'd out of the Bed, danced
about the Room in a frantic manner, tore
her Hair and beat her Breast in all the Agonies
of Despair; in which sad Condition
her Aunt, who likewise arose at the News,
found her. The good old Lady applied
her utmost Art to comfort her Niece. She
told her, “while there was Life, there was
Hope: but that if he should die, her
Affliction would be of no service to Bellarmine,
and would only expose herself,
which might probably keep her some
time without any future Offer; that as
Matters had happened, her wisest way
would be to think no more of Bellarmine,
but to endeavour to reconcile herself to
Horatio.” “Speak not to me,” cry'd the
disconsolate Leonora, “is it not owing
to me, that poor Bellarmine has lost his
Life? have not these cursed Charms” (at
which Words she looked stedfastly in the
Glass,) “been the Ruin of the most charming
Man of this Age? Can I ever bear to
contemplate my own Face again?” (with
her Eyes still fixed on the Glass) “Am I
not the Murderess of the finest Gentleman?—” 
“Never think of Things
passed,” cries the Aunt, “think of 

reconciling yourself to Horatio.” “What
Reason,” said the Niece, “have I
to hope he would forgive me? no, I
have lost him as well as the other, and
it was your wicked Advice which was
the Occasion of all; you seduced me,
contrary to my Inclinations, to abandon
poor Horatio,” at which Words she
burst into Tears; “you prevailed upon
me, whether I would or no, to give up
my Affections for him; had it not been
for you, Bellarmine never would have
entered into my Thoughts; had not his
Addresses been backed by your Persuasions,
they never would have made any
Impression on me; I should have defied
all the Fortune and Equipage in the
World: but it was you, it was you,
who got the better of my Youth and
Simplicity, and forced me to lose my
dear Horatio for ever.” 
The Aunt was almost borne down with
this Torrent of Words, she however rallied
all the Strength she could, and drawing
her Mouth up in a Purse, began: “I am
not surprized, Niece, at this Ingratitude. 
Those who advise young Women for their
Interest, must always expect such a Return: 
I am convinced my Brother will
thank me for breaking off your Match 

with Horatio at any rate.” “That may
not be in your power yet,” answered
Leonora; “tho' it is very ungrateful in you
to desire or attempt it, after the Presents
you have received from him.” (For indeed
true it is, that many Presents, and
some pretty valuable ones, had passed from
Horatio to the old Lady: but as true it is,
that Bellarmine when he breakfasted with
her and her Niece, had complimented her
with a Brilliant from his Finger, of much
greater Value than all she had touched of
the other.) 
The Aunt's Gall was on float to reply,
when a Servant brought a Letter into the
Room; which Leonora hearing it came
from Bellarmine, with great Eagerness
opened, and read as follows: 

Most Divine Creature,
The Wound which I fear you have
heard I received from my Rival,
is not like to be so fatal as those shot into
my Heart, which have been fired from
your Eyes, tout-brilliant. Those are the
only Cannons by which I am to fall:
for my Surgeon gives me Hopes of being
soon able to attend your Ruelle; 'till
when, unless you would do me an Honour
which I have scarce the Hardiesse 

to think of, your Absence will be the
greatest Anguish which can be felt by, 
Madam,
Avec tout le respecte in the World,
Your most Obedient, most Absolute
Devoté,
Bellarmine. 
As soon as Leonora perceived such
Hopes of Bellarmine's Recovery, and that
the Gossip Fame had, according to Custom,
so enlarged his Danger, she presently
abandoned all farther Thoughts of Horatio,
and was soon reconciled to her Aunt,
who received her again into Favour, with a
more Christian Forgiveness than we generally
meet with. Indeed it is possible she
might be a little alarmed at the Hints
which her Niece had given her concerning
the Presents. She might apprehend such
Rumours, should they get abroad, might
injure a Reputation, which by frequenting
Church twice a day, and preserving
the utmost Rigour and Strictness in her
Countenance and Behaviour for many
Years, she had established. 

Leonora's Passion returned now for
Bellarmine with greater Force after its
small Relaxation than ever. She proposed
to her Aunt to make him a Visit in his
Confinement, which the old Lady, with
great and commendable Prudence advised
her to decline: “For,” says she,
should any Accident intervene to prevent
your intended Match, too forward a
Behaviour with this Lover may injure
you in the Eyes of others. Every Woman
'till she is married ought to consider
of and provide against the Possibility
of the Affair's breaking off.” Leonora
said, “she should be indifferent to
whatever might happen in such a Case:
for she had now so absolutely placed her
Affections on this dear Man (so she called
him) that, if it was her misfortune to
lose him, she should for ever abandon
all Thoughts of Mankind.” She therefore
resolved to visit him, notwithstanding
all the prudent Advice of her Aunt to the
contrary, and that very Afternoon executed
her Resolution. 
The Lady was proceeding in her Story,
when the Coach drove into the Inn where
the Company were to dine, sorely to the
dissatisfaction of Mr. Adams, whose Ears 

were the most hungry Part about him; he
being, as the Reader may perhaps guess,
of an insatiable Curiosity, and heartily desirous
of hearing the End of this Amour,
tho' he professed he could scarce with Success
to a Lady of so inconstant a Disposition. 



A dreadful Quarrel which happened at
the Inn where the Company dined,
with its bloody Consequences to Mr.
Adams. 
As soon as the Passengers had alighted
from the Coach, Mr. Adams, as was
his Custom, made directly to the Kitchin,
where he found Joseph sitting by the Fire
and the Hostess anointing his Leg: for the
Horse which Mr. Adams had borrowed of
his Clerk, had so violent a Propensity to
kneeling, that one would have thought it
had likewise been his Trade: nor would he
always give any notice of such his Intention; 
he was often found on his Knees, when the
Rider least expected it. This Foible
however was of no great Inconvenience to
the Parson, who was accustomed to it, and 

threw himself forward on such Occasions
with so much dexterity, that he never received
any Mischief; the Horse and he
frequently rolling many Paces distance,
and afterwards both getting up and meeting
as good Friends as ever. 
Poor Joseph, who had not been used
to such kind of Cattle, tho' an excellent
Horseman, did not so happily disengage
himself: but falling with his Leg under
the Beast, received a violent Contusion,
to which the good Woman was, as we
have said, applying a warm Hand with
some camphirated Spirits just at the time
when the Parson entered the Kitchin. 
He had scarce express'd his Concern
for Joseph's Misfortune, before the Host
likewise entered. He was by no means
of Mr. Tow-wouse's gentle Disposition,
and was indeed perfect Master of
his House and every thing in it but his
Guests. 
This surly Fellow, who always proportioned
his Respect to the Appearance of
a Traveller, from God bless your Honour,
down to plain Coming presently, observing
his Wife on her Knees to a Footman, cried
out, without considering his Circumstances, 

What a Pox is the Woman about? why
don't you mind the Company in the Coach? 
Go and ask them what they will have for
Dinner?” “My Dear,” says she, “you
know they can have nothing but what is
at the Fire, which will be ready presently; 
and really the poor young Man's Leg is
very much bruised.” At which Words,
she fell to chafing more violently than before:
the Bell then happening to ring, he
damn'd his Wife, and bid her go in to the
Company, and not stand rubbing there all
day: for he did not believe the young
Fellow's Leg was so bad as he pretended; 
and if it was, within twenty Miles he would
find a Surgeon to cut it off. Upon these
Words, Adams fetched two Strides across
the Room; and snapping his Fingers over
his Head muttered aloud, He would excommunicate
such a Wretch for a Farthing: for
he believed the Devil had more Humanity. 
These Words occasioned a Dialogue between
Adams and the Host, in which there
were two or three sharp Replies, 'till Joseph
bad the latter know how to behave
himself to his Betters. At which the
Host scornfully repeating the word Betters,
flew into a Rage, and telling Joseph
he was as able to walk out of his House
as he had been to walk into it, offered to
lay violent Hands on him; which Adams 

perceiving, dealt him so found a Compliment
over his Face with his Fist, that the
Blood immediately gushed out of his Nose
in a Stream. The Host being unwilling
to be out-done in Courtesy, especially by
a Person of Adams's Figure, returned the
Favour with so much Gratitude, that the
Person's Nostrils likewise began to look a
little redder than usual. Upon which he
again assailed his Antagonist, and with another
stroke laid him sprawling on the
Floor. 
The Hostess, who was a better Wife
than so surly a Husband deserved, seeing her
Husband all bloody and stretched along,
hastened presently to his assistance, or rather
to revenge the Blow which to all appearance
was the last he would ever receive; when,
lo! a Pan full of Hog's-Blood, which unluckily
stood on the Dresser, presented itself
first to her Hands. She seized it in her Fury,
and without any Reflection discharged it into
the Parson's Face, and with so good an
Aim, that much the greater part first saluting
his Countenance, trickled thence in so
large a current down his Beard, and over his
Garments, that a more horrible Spectacle
was hardly to be seen or even imagined. 
All which was perceived by Mrs. Slipslop,
who entered the Kitchin at that Instant. 

This good Gentlewoman, not being of a
Temper so extremely cool and patient as
perhaps was required to ask many Questions
on this Occasion; flew with great
Impetuosity at the Hostess's Cap, which,
together with some of her Hair, she plucked
from her Head in a moment, giving her
at the same time several hearty Cuffs in
the Face, which by frequent Practice on
the inferiour Servants, she had learned an
excellent Knack of delivering with a good
Grace. Poor Joseph could hardly rise
from his Chair; the Parson was employed
in wiping the Blood from his Eyes, which
had intirely blinded him, and the Landlord
was but just beginning to stir, whilst Mrs.
Slipslop holding down the Landlady's Face
with her Left Hand, made so dextrous
a use of her Right, that the poor Woman
began to roar in a Key, which alarmed all
the Company in the Inn. 
There happened to be in the Inn at
this time, besides the Ladies who arrived
in the Stage-Coach, the two Gentlemen
who were present at Mr. Tow-wouse's
when Joseph was detained for his Horse's-Meat,
and whom we have before mentioned
to have stopt at the Alehouse with
Adams. There was likewise a Gentleman
just returned from his Travels; all whom 

the horrid Outcry of Murther, presently
brought into the Kitchin, where the several
Combatants were found in the Postures
already described. 
It was now no difficulty to put an end
to the Fray, the Conquerors being satisfied
with the Vengeance they had taken,
and the Conquered having no Appetite to
renew the Fight. The principal Figure,
and which engaged the Eyes of all was
Adams, who was all over covered with
Blood, which the whole Company concluded
to be his own; and consequently
imagined him no longer for this World. 
But the Host, who had now recovered
from his Blow, and was risen from
the Ground, soon delivered them from this
Apprehension, by damning his Wife, for
wasting the Hog's Puddings, and telling
her all would have been very well if
she had not intermeddled like a B&wblank; 
as she was; adding, he was very glad the
Gentlewoman had paid her, tho' not half
what she deserved. The poor Woman
had indeed fared much the worst, having,
besides the unmerciful Cuffs received, lost
a Quantity of Hair which Mrs. Slipslop in
Triumph held in her left Hand. 

The Traveller, addressing himself to
Miss Grave-airs, desired her not to be
frightened: for here had been only a little
Boxing, which he said to their Disgracia
the English were accustomata to; 
adding, it must be however a Sight somewhat
strange to him, who was just come
from Italy, the Italians not being addicted
to the Ciffardo, but Bastonza, says he. 
He then went up to Adams, and telling
him he looked like the Ghost of Othello,
bid him not shake his gory Locks at him,
for he could not say he did it. Adams very
innocently answered, Sir, I am far from
accusing you. He then returned to the
Lady, and cried, I find the bloody Gentleman
is uno insipido del nullo senso. 
One of the Gentlemen having learnt
from the Host the Occasion of this
Bustle, and being assured by him that
Adams had struck the first Blow, whispered
in his Ear: He'd warrant he would
recover. “Recover! Master,” said the
Host, smiling: “Yes, yes, I am not
afraid of dying with a Blow or two
neither; I am not such a Chicken as
that.” Pugh! said the Gentleman, I
mean you will recover Damages, in that
Action which undoubtedly you intend to 

bring, as soon as a Writ can be returned
from London; for you look like a Man
of too much Spirit and Courage to suffer
any one to beat you without bringing your
Action against him: He must be a scandalous
Fellow indeed, who would put up
a Drubbing whilst the Law is open to revenge
it; besides, he hath drawn Blood
from you and spoiled your Coat, and the
Jury will give Damages for that too. An
excellent new Coat upon my Word, and
now not worth a Shilling! 
I Don't care, continued he, to intermeddle
in these Cases: but you have a
Right to my Evidence; and if I am sworn,
I must speak the Truth. I saw you sprawling
on the Floor, and the Blood gushing
from your Nostrils. You may take your own
Opinion; but was I in your Circumstances,
every Drop of my Blood should convey an
Ounce of Gold into my Pocket: remember
I don't advise you to go to Law, but if
your Jury were Christians, they must give
swinging Damages, that's all. “Master,” 
cry'd the Host, scratching his Head, “I
have no stomach to Law, I thank you. 
I have seen enough of that in the Parish,
where two of my Neighbours have been
at Law about a House, 'till they have
both lawed themselves into a Goal.” At 

which Words he turned about, and began
to enquire again after his Hog's Puddings,
nor would it probably have been
a sufficient Excuse for his Wife that she
spilt them in his Defence, had not some
Awe of the Company, especially of the
Italian Traveller, with-held his Rage. 
Whilst one of the above-mentioned Gentlemen
was employed, as we have seen him,
on the behalf of the Landlord, the other was
no less hearty on the side of Mr. Adams,
whom he advised to bring his Action immediately. 
He said the Assault of the
Wife was in Law the Assault of the Husband; 
for they were but one Person; and
he was liable to pay Damages, which he
said must be considerable, where so bloody
a Disposition appeared. Adams answered,
if it was true that they were but one Person
he had assaulted the Wife; for he was
sorry to own he had struck the Husband
the first Blow. I am sorry you own it too,
cries the Gentleman; for it could not possibly
appear to the Court: for here was no
Evidence present but the lame Man in the
Chair, whom I supposed to be your Friend,
and would consequently say nothing but
what made for you. How, Sir, says Adams,
do you take me for a Villain, who
would prosecute Revenge in cold Blood,
and use unjustifiable Means to obtain it? 

If you knew me and my Order, I should
think you affronted both. At the word
Order, the Gentleman stared, (for he was
too bloody to be of any modern Order of
Knights,) and turning hastily about, said,
every Man knew his own Business. 
Matters being now composed, the
Company retired to their several Apartments,
the two Gentlemen congratulating
each other on the Success of their good
Offices, in procuring a perfect Reconciliation
between the contending Parties; and
the Traveller went to his Repast, crying: 
Tutta è Pace; so send in my Dinner, good
Boniface. 
The Coachman began now to grow importunate
with his Passengers, whose Entrance
into the Coach was retarded by Miss
Grave-airs insisting, against the Remonstrances
of all the rest, that she would not
admit a Footman into the Coach: for poor
Joseph was too lame to mount a Horse. A
young Lady, who was, as it seems, an Earl's
Grand Daughter, begged it with almost
Tears in her Eyes; Mr. Adams prayed,
and Mrs. Slipslop scolded, but all to no
purpose. She said, “she would not demean
herself to ride with a Footman:
that there were Waggons on the Road: 

that if the Master of the Coach desired
it, she would pay for two Places: but
would suffer no such Fellow to come in.” 
“Madam,” says Slipslop, “I am sure no
one can refuse another coming into a
Stage-Coach.” “I don't know, Madam,” 
says the Lady, “I am not much
used to Stage-Coaches, I seldom travel
in them.” “That may be, Madam,” 
replied Slipslop, “very good People do,
and some People's Betters, for aught I
know.” Miss Grave-airs said, “some
Folks, might sometimes give their
Tongues a liberty, to some People that
were their Betters, which did not become
them: for her part, she was not
used to converse with Servants.” Slipslop
returned, “some People kept no Servants
to converse with: for her part, she
thanked Heaven, she lived in a Family
where there were a great many; and
had more under her own Command, than
any paultry little Gentlewoman in the
Kingdom.” Miss Grave-airs cry'd,
she believed, her Mistress would not
encourage such Sauciness to her Betters.” 
“My Betters,” says Slipslop, “who is my
Betters, pray?” “I am your Betters,” 
answered Miss Grave-airs, “and I'll acquaint
your Mistress.” —At which Mrs.
Slipslop laughed aloud, and told her, “her 

Lady was one of the great Gentry, and
such little paultry Gentlewomen, as some
Folks who travelled in Stage-Coaches,
would not easily come at her.” 
This smart Dialogue between some
People, and some Folks, was going on
at the Coach-Door, when a solemn Person
riding into the Inn, and seeing Miss
Grave-airs, immediately accosted her with
“Dear Child, how do you?” She presently
answered, “O! Papa, I am glad you have
overtaken me.” “So am I,” answered
he: “for one of our Coaches is just at
hand; and there being room for you
in it, you shall go no farther in the Stage,
unless you desire it.” “How can you
imagine I should desire it?” says she; 
so bidding Slipslop, “ride with her Fellow,
if she pleased;” she took her Father
by the Hand, who was just alighted,
and walked with him into a Room. 
Adams instantly asked the Coachman
in a Whisper, if he knew who the Gentleman
was? The Coachman answered, he
was not a Gentleman, and kept his Horse
and Man: but Times are altered, Master,
said he, I remember, when he was no better
born than myself. Aye, aye, says Adams. 
My Father drove the Squire's Coach, 

answered he, when that very Man rode
Postilion: but he is now his Steward, and
a great Gentleman. Adams then snapped his
Fingers, and cry'd, he thought she was
some such Trollop. 
Adams made haste to acquaint Mrs.
Slipslop with this good News, as he imagined
it; but it found a Reception different
from what he expected. That prudent
Gentlewoman, who despised the Anger
of Miss Grave-airs, whilst she conceived
her the Daughter of a Gentleman
of small Fortune, now she heard her Alliance
with the upper Servants of a great
Family in her Neighbourhood, began to
fear her Interest with the Mistress. She
wished she had not carried the Dispute so
far, and began to think of endeavouring
to reconcile herself to the young Lady before
she left the Inn; when luckily, the
Scene at London, which the Reader can
scarce have forgotten, presented itself to
her Mind, and comforted her with such
Assurance, that she no longer apprehended
any Enemy with her Mistress. 
Every thing being now adjusted, the
Company entered the Coach, which was
just on its Departure, when one Lady
recollected she had left her Fan, a second 

her Gloves, a third a Snuff-Box, and a
fourth a Smelling-Bottle behind her; to
find all which, occasioned some Delay, and
much swearing of the Coachman. 
As soon as the Coach had left the Inn,
the Women all together fell to the Character
of Miss Grave-airs, whom one of
them declared she had suspected to be some
low Creature from the beginning of their
Journey; and another affirmed had not
even the Looks of a Gentlewoman; a
third warranted she was no better than she
should be, and turning to the Lady who had
related the Story in the Coach, said, “Did
you ever hear, Madam, any thing so
prudish as her Remarks?” Well, deliver
me from the Censoriousness of such a Prude. 
The fourth added, “O Madam! all
these Creatures are censorious: but for
my part, I wonder where the Wretch was
bred; indeed I must own I have seldom
conversed with these mean kind of People,
so that it may appear stranger to me; but
to refuse the general Desire of a whole
Company, hath something in it so astonishing,
that, for my part, I own I
should hardly believe it, if my own Ears
had not been Witnesses to it.” “Yes,
and so handsome a young Fellow, cries
Slipslop, the Woman must have no Compassion 

in her, I believe she is more of
a Turk than a Christian; I am certain
if she had any Christian Woman's Blood
in her Veins, the Sight of such a young
Fellow must have warm'd it. Indeed
there are some wretched, miserable old
Objects that turn one's Stomach, I
should not wonder if she had refused such
a one; I am as nice as herself, and should
have cared no more than herself for the
Company of stinking old Fellows: but
hold up thy Head, Joseph, thou art none
of those, and she who hath no Compulsion
for thee is a Myhummetman, and I
will maintain it.” This Conversation
made Joseph uneasy, as well as the Ladies; 
who perceiving the Spirits which Mrs.
Slipslop was in, (for indeed she was not a
Cup too low) began to fear the Consequence; 
one of them therefore desired the
Lady to conclude the Story—“Ay Madam,” 
said Slipslop, “I beg your Ladyship to give
us that Story you commencated in the
Morning,” which Request that well-bred
Woman immediately complied with. 




Conclusion of the Unfortunate Jilt. 
Leonora having once broke
through the Bounds which Custom
and Modesty impose on her Sex,
soon gave an unbridled Indulgence to her
Passion. Her Visits to Bellarmine were more
constant, as well as longer, than his Surgeon's; 
in a word, she became absolutely
his Nurse, made his Water-gruel, administred
him his Medicines, and, notwithstanding
the prudent Advice of her Aunt
to the contrary, almost intirely resided in
her wounded Lover's Apartment. 
The Ladies of the Town began to take
her Conduct under consideration; it was
the chief Topick of Discourse at their Tea-Tables,
and was very severely censured by
the most part; especially by Lindamira,
a Lady whose discreet and starch Carriage,
together with a constant Attendance at
Church three times a day, had utterly defeated
many malicious Attacks on her own
Reputation: for such was the Envy that
Lindamira's Virtue had attracted, that
notwithstanding her own strict Behaviour
and strict Enquiry into the Lives of others, 

she had not been able to escape being the
Mark of some Arrows herself, which however
did her no Injury; a Blessing perhaps
owed by her to the Clergy, who were her
chief male Companions, and with two or
three of whom she had been barbarously
and unjustly calumniated. 
Not so unjustly neither perhaps, says
Slipslop, for the Clergy are Men as well
as other Folks. 
The extreme Delicacy of Lindamira's
Virtue was cruelly hurt by these Freedoms
which Leonora allowed herself; she said,
“it was an Affront to her Sex, that she
did not imagine it consistent with any
Woman's Honour to speak to the Creature,
or to be seen in her Company; 
and that, for her part, she should always
refuse to dance at an Assembly with
her, for fear of Contamination, by
taking her by the Hand.” 
But to return to my Story: As soon as
Bellarmine was recovered, which was somewhat
within a Month from his receiving
the Wound, he set out, according to Agreement,
for Leonora's Father's, in order
to propose the Match and settle all Matters 

with him touching Settlements, and the
like. 
A little before his Arrival, the old
Gentleman had received an Intimation of
the Affair by the following Letter; which
I can repeat verbatim, and which they say
was written neither by Leonora nor her
Aunt, tho' it was in a Woman's Hand. 
The Letter was in these Words: 

“SIR,
I am sorry to acquaint you that your
Daughter Leonora hath acted one of
the basest, as well as most simple Parts
with a young Gentleman to whom she
had engaged herself, and whom she hath
(pardon the Word) jilted for another of
inferiour Fortune, notwithstanding his
superiour Figure. You may take what
Measures you please on this Occasion; 
I have performed what I thought my
Duty, as I have, tho' unknown to you,
a very great Respect for your Family.” 
The old Gentleman did not give himself
the trouble to answer this kind Epistle,
nor did he take any notice of it after he
had read it, 'till he saw Bellarmine. He
was, to say the truth, one of those Fathers
who look on Children as an unhappy 

Consequence of their youthful Pleasures; 
which as he would have been delighted
not to have had attended them, so was he
no less pleased with any opportunity to rid
himself of the Incumbrance. He pass'd in
the World's Language as an exceeding good
Father, being not only so rapacious as to
rob and plunder all Mankind to the utmost
of his power, but even to deny himself the
Conveniencies and almost Necessaries of
Life; which his Neighbours attributed to
a desire of raising immense Fortunes for his
Children: but in fact it was not so, he
heaped up Money for its own sake only,
and looked on his Children as his Rivals,
who were to enjoy his beloved Mistress,
when he was incapable of possessing her,
and which he would have been much more
charmed with the Power of carrying along
with him: nor had his Children any
other Security of being his Heirs, than
that the Law would constitute them such
without a Will, and that he had not Affection
enough for any one living to take
the trouble of writing one. 
To this Gentleman came Bellarmine on
the Errand I have mentioned. His Person,
his Equipage, his Family and his Estate
seemed to the Father to make him an advantageous
Match for his Daughter; he therefore 

very readily accepted his Proposals: but
Bellarmine when he imagined the principal
Affair concluded, and began to open the incidental
Matters of Fortune; the old Gentleman
presently changed his Countenance,
saying, “he resolved never to marry his
Daughter on a Smithfield Match; that whoever
had Love for her to take her, would,
when he died, find her Share of his Fortune
in his Coffers: but he had seen
such Examples of Undutifulness happen
from the too early Generosity of Parents,
that he had made a Vow never
to part with a Shilling whilst he lived. 
He commended the Saying of Solomon,
he that spareth the Rod, spoileth
the Child: but added, he might have
likewise asserted, that he that spareth the
Purse, saveth the Child.” He then ran
into a Discourse on the Extravagance of
the Youth of the Age; whence he launched
into a Dissertation on Horses, and came
at length to commend those Bellarmine
drove. That fine Gentleman, who at another
Season would have been well enough
pleased to dwell a little on that Subject,
was now very eager to resume the Circumstance
of Fortune. He said, “he had
a very high value for the young Lady,
and would receive her with less than he
would any other whatever; but that even his 

Love to her made some Regard to
worldly Matters necessary; for it would
be a most distracting Sight for him
to see her, when he had the Honour
to be her Husband, in less than a Coach
and Six.” The old Gentleman answer'd,
“Four will do, Four will do;” and then
took a turn from Horses to Extravagance,
and from Extravagance to Horses, till
he came round to the Equipage again,
whither he was no sooner arrived, than
Bellarmine brought him back to the Point; 
but all to no purpose, he made his Escape
in a Minute, till at last the Lover
declared, “that in the present Situation
of his Affairs it was impossible for him,
though he loved Leonora more than
tout le monde, to marry her without
any Fortune.” To which the Father
answered, “he was sorry then his Daughter
must lose so valuable a Match; that
if he had an Inclination at present, it
was not in his power to advance a Shilling:
that he had had great Losses and
been at great Expences on Projects, which,
though he had great Expectation from
them, had yet produced him nothing:
that he did not know what might happen
hereafter, as on the Birth of a Son,
or such Accident, but he would make
no promise, or enter into any Article: 

for he would not break his Vow for
all the Daughters in the World”. 
In short, Ladies, to keep you no longer
in suspense, Bellarmine having tried every
Argument and Persuasion which he could
invent, and finding them all ineffectual, at
length took his leave, but not in order
to return to Leonora; he proceeded directly
to his own Seat, whence after a few
Day's stay, he returned to Paris, to the
great delight of the French, and the honour
of the English Nation. 
But as soon as he arrived at his home,
he presently dispatched a Messenger, with
the following Epistle to Leonora. 

Adorable and Charmante,
I Am sorry to have the Honour to
tell you I am not the heureux Person
destined for your divine Arms. Your
Papa hath told me so with a Politesse
not often seen on this side Paris. You
may perhaps guess his manner of refusing
me—Ah mon Dieu! You will
certainly believe me, Madam, incapable
of my self delivering this triste Message: 
Which I intend to try the French Air
to cure the Consequences of—Ah jamais! 
Cæur! Ange! —Ab Diable! —If 

your Papa obliges you to a Marriage,
I hope we shall see you at Paris, till
when the Wind that flows from thence
will be the warmest dans le Monde:
for it will consist almost entirely of my
Sighs, Adieu, ma Princesse! Ah Amour! 
BELLARMINE.” 
I Shall not attempt Ladies, to describe
Leonora's Condition when she received
this Letter. It is a Picture of Horrour,
which I should have as little pleasure
in drawing as you in beholding. She
immediately left the Place, where she was
the Subject of Conversation and Ridicule,
and retired to that House I shewed you
when I began the Story, where she hath
ever since led a disconsolate Life, and deserves
perhaps Pity for her Misfortunes
more than our Censure, for a Behaviour
to which the Artifices of her Aunt very
probably contributed, and to which very
young Women are often rendered too liable,
by that blameable Levity in the Education
of our Sex. 
If I was inclined to pity her, said a young
Lady in the Coach, it would be for the Loss
of Horatio; for I cannot discern any Misfortune 

in her missing such a Husband as
Bellarmine. 
Why I must own, says Slipslop, the
Gentleman was a little false-hearted: but
howsumever it was hard to have two Lovers,
and get never a Husband at all— 
But pray, Madam, what became of Ourasho? 
He remains still unmarried, and hath
applied himself so strictly to his Business,
that he hath raised I hear a very considerable
Fortune. And what is remarkable, they
say, he never heard the name of Leonora
without a Sigh, or hath ever uttered one
Syllable to charge her with her ill Conduct
towards him. 



A very short Chapter, in which Parson
Adams went a great Way. 
The Lady having finished her Story
received the Thanks of the Company,
and now Joseph putting his Head out
of the Coach, cried out, “Never believe
me, if yonder be not our Parson Adams 

walking along without his Horse.” “On
my Word, and so he is,” says Slipslop; 
“and as sure as Two-pence, he hath left
him behind at the Inn.” Indeed, true
it is, the Parson had exhibited a fresh Instance
of his Absence of Mind: for he
was so pleased with having got Joseph into
the Coach, that he never once thought
of the Beast in the Stable; and finding his
Legs as nimble as he desired, he sallied out
brandishing a Crabstick, and had kept on
before the Coach, mending and slackening
his Pace occasionally, so that he had never
been much more or less than a Quarter of
a Mile distant from it. 
Mrs. Slipslop desired the Coachman to
overtake him, which he attempted, but in
vain: for the faster he drove, the faster
ran the Parson, often crying out, Aye
aye, catch me if you can: 'till at length the
Coachman swore he would as soon attempt
to drive after a Greyhound; and
giving the Parson two or three hearty
Curses, he cry'd, Softly, softly Boys, to his
Horses, which the civil Beasts immediately
obeyed. 
But we will be more courteous to our
Reader than he was to Mrs. Slipslop, and leaving
the Coach and its Company to pursue their
Journey, we will carry our Reader on after 

Parson Adams, who stretched on without
once looking behind him, 'till having
left the Coach full three Miles in his Rear,
he came to a Place, where by keeping the
extremest Track to the Right, it was just
barely possible for a human Creature to
miss his Way. This Track however did
he keep, as indeed he had a wonderful
Capacity at these kinds of bare Possibilities; 
and travelling in it about three Miles over
the Plain, he arrived at the Summit of a
Hill, whence looking a great way backwards,
and perceiving no Coach in sight,
he sat himself down on the Turf, and pulling
out his Æschylus determined to wait
here for its Arrival. 
He had not sat long here, before a
Gun going off very near, a little startled
him; he looked up, and saw a Gentleman
within a hundred Paces taking up a Partridge,
which he had just shot. 
Adams stood up, and presented a Figure
to the Gentleman which would have
moved Laughter in many; for his Cassock
had just again fallen down below his great
Coat, that is to say, it reached his Knees; 
whereas, the Skirts of his great Coat descended
no lower than half way down his
Thighs: but the Gentleman's Mirth gave 

way to his Surprize, at beholding such a
Personage in such a Place. 
Adams advancing to the Gentleman
told him he hoped he had good Sport; to
which the other answered, very little. “I
see, Sir,” says Adams, “you have smote one
Partridge:” to which the Sportsman made
no Reply, but proceeded to charge his
Piece. 
Whilst the Gun was charging, Adams
remained in Silence, which he at last
broke, by observing that it was a delightful
Evening. The Gentleman, who had
at first sight conceived a very distasteful
Opinion of the Parson, began, on perceiving
a Book in his Hand, and smoking
likewise the Information of the Cassock,
to change his Thoughts, and made a small
Advance to Conversation on his side, by
saying, Sir, I suppose you are not one of
these Parts? 
Adams immediately told him, No; that
he was a Traveller, and invited by the
Beauty of the Evening and the Place to repose
a little, and amuse himself with reading. 
“I may as well repose myself too, said the
Sportsman; for I have been out this 

whole Afternoon, and the Devil a Bird
have I seen 'till I came hither.” 
“Perhaps then the Game is not very
plenty hereabouts, cries Adams.” “No,
Sir,” said the Gentleman, “the Soldiers,
who are quartered in the Neighbourhood,
have killed it all.” “It is very probable,” 
cries Adams, “for Shooting is their
Profession.” “Ay, shooting the Game,” 
answered the other, “but I don't see they
are so forward to shoot our Enemies. 
I don't like that Affair of Carthagena; 
if I had been there, I believe I should
have done other guess things, d&wblank;n me; 
what's a Man's Life when his Country
demands it; a Man who won't sacrifice
his Life for his Country deserves to be
hanged, d&wblank;n me.” Which Words he
spoke with so violent a Gesture, so loud a
Voice, so strong an Accent, and so fierce a
Countenance, that he might have frightned
a Captain of Trained-Bands at the Head of
his Company; but Mr. Adams was not
greatly subject to Fear, he told him intrepidly
that he very much approved his
Virtue, but disliked his Swearing, and begged
him not to addict himself to so bad
a Custom, without which he said he might
fight as bravely as Achilles did. Indeed
he was charm'd with this Discourse,
he told the Gentleman he would willingly 

have gone many Miles to have met a Man
of his generous Way of thinking; that if
he pleased to sit down, he should be greatly
delighted to commune with him: for
tho' he was a Clergyman, he would himself
be ready, if thereto called, to lay down
his Life for his Country. 
The Gentleman sat down and Adams
by him, and then the latter began, as in
the following Chapter, a Discourse which
we have placed by itself, as it is not only
the most curious in this, but perhaps in
any other Book. 



A notable Dissertation, by Mr. Abraham
Adams; wherein that Gentleman
appears in a political Light. 
“I do assure you, Sir,” says he, taking
the Gentleman by the Hand, “I
am heartily glad to meet with a Man
of your Kidney: for tho' I am a poor
Parson, I will be bold to say, I am an
honest Man, and would not do an ill
Thing to be made a Bishop: Nay, tho'
it hath not fallen in my way to offer so 

noble a Sacrifice, I have not been
without Opportunities of suffering for
the sake of my Conscience, I thank
Heaven for them: for I have had Relations,
tho' I say it, who made some Figure
in the World; particularly a Nephew,
who was a Shopkeeper, and an
Alderman of a Corporation. He was
a good Lad, and was under my Care
when a Boy, and I believe would do
what I bid him to his dying Day. Indeed,
it looks like extreme Vanity in me,
to affect being a Man of such Consequence,
as to have so great an Interest
in an Alderman; but others have thought
so too, as manifestly appeared by the
Rector, whose Curate I formerly was,
sending for me on the Approach of an
Election, and telling me if I expected
to continue in his Cure, that I must
bring my Nephew to vote for one Colonel
Courtley, a Gentleman whom I had
never heard Tidings of 'till that Instant. 
I told the Rector, I had no power over
my Nephew's Vote, (God forgive me for
such Prevarication!) That I supposed he
would give it according to his Conscience,
that I would by no means endeavour
to influence him to give it otherwise. 
He told me it was in vain to equivocate; 
that he knew I had already 

spoke to him in favour of Esquire Fickle
my Neighbour, and indeed it was true I
had: for it was at a Season when the
Church was in Danger, and when all
good Men expected they knew not what
would happen to us all. I then answered
boldly, If he thought I had given my
Promise, he affronted me, in proposing
any Breach of it. Not to be prolix: I
persevered, and so did my Nephew, in
the Esquire's Interest, who was chose
chiefly through his Means, and so I
lost my Curacy.” “Well, Sir, but do
you think the Esquire ever mentioned
a Word of the Church? Ne verbum quidem,
ut ita dicam; within two Years he
got a Place, and hath ever since lived in
London; where I have been informed,
(but G&wblank; forbid I should believe that)
that he never so much as goeth to
Church. I remained, Sir, a considerable
Time without any Cure, and lived
a full Month on one Funeral Sermon,
which I preached on the Indisposition of a
Clergyman: but this by the Bye. At last,
when Mr. Fickle got his Place, Colonel
Courtly stood again; and who should
make Interest for him, but Mr. Fickle
himself: that very identical Mr. Fickle,
who had formerly told me, the Colonel
was an Enemy to both the Church and 

State, had the Confidence to sollicite my
Nephew for him, and the Colonel himself
offered me to make me Chaplain to
his Regiment, which I refused in favour of
Sir Oliver Hearty, who told us, he
would sacrifice every thing to his Country; 
and I believe he would, except his
Hunting, which he stuck so close to,
that in five Years together, he went
but twice up to Parliament; and one of
those Times, I have been told, never
was within sight of the House. However,
he was a worthy Man, and the
best Friend I ever had: for by his Interest
with a Bishop, he got me replaced
into my Curacy, and gave me eight
Pounds out of his own Pocket to buy me
a Gown and Cassock, and furnish my
House. He had our Interest while he
lived, which was not many Years. On
his Death, I had fresh Applications made
to me; for all the World knew the Interest
I had in my good Nephew, who
now was a leading Man in the Corporation; 
and Sir Thomas Booby, buying the
Estate which had been Sir Oliver's, proposed
himself a Candidate. He was then a
young Gentleman just come from his Travels; 
and it did me good to hear him discourse
on Affairs, which for my part I
knew nothing of. If I had been Master 

of a thousand Votes, he should have
had them all. I engaged my Nephew
in his Interest, and he was elected, and a
very fine Parliament-Man he was. They
tell me he made Speeches of an Hour
long; and I have been told very fine
ones: but he could never persuade the
Parliament to be of his Opinion. —Non
omnia possumus omnes. He promised me
a Living, poor Man; and I believe I
I should have had it, but an Accident
happened; which was, that my Lady had
promised it before unknown to him. 
This indeed I never heard 'till afterwards:
for my Nephew, who died about
a Month before the Incumbent, always
told me I might be assured of it. 
Since that Time, Sir Thomas, poor Man,
had always so much Business, that he
never could find Leisure to see me. I believe
it was partly my Lady's fault too:
who did not think my Dress good enough
for the Gentry at her Table. However,
I must do him the Justice to say, he never
was ungrateful; and I have always
found his Kitchin, and his Cellar too,
open to me; many a time after Service
on a Sunday, for I preach at four Churches,
have I recruited my Spirits with a
Glass of his Ale. Since my Nephew's
Death, the Corporation is in other 

hands; and I am not a Man of that
Consequence I was formerly. I have
now no longer any Talents to lay out
in the Service of my Country; and to
whom nothing is given, of him can nothing
be required. However, on all
proper Seasons, such as the Approach
of an Election, I throw a suitable Dash
or two into my Sermons; which I have
the pleasure to hear is not disagreeable to
Sir Thomas, and the other honest Gentlemen
my Neighbours, who have all
promised me these five Years, to procure
an Ordination for a Son of mine, who
is now near Thirty, hath an infinite
Stock of Learning, and is, I thank Heaven,
of an unexceptionable Life; tho',
as he was never at an University, the Bishop
refuses to ordain him. Too much
Care cannot indeed be taken in admitting
any to the sacred Office; tho' I
hope he will never act so as to be a Disgrace
to any Order: but will serve his
God and his Country to the utmost of his
power, as I have endeavoured to do before
him; nay, and will lay down his
Life whenever called to that purpose. 
I am sure I have educated him in those
Principles; so that I have acquitted my
Duty, and shall have nothing to answer
for on that account: but I do not distrust 

trust him; for he is a good Boy; and if
Providence should throw it in his way,
to be of much consequence in a public
Light, as his Father once was, I can
answer for him, he will use his Talents
as honestly as I have done. 



In which the Gentleman descants on
Bravery and heroic Virtue, 'till an
unlucky Accident puts an end to
the Discourse. 
The Gentleman highly commended
Mr. Adams for his good Resolutions,
and told him, “he hoped his Son would
tread in his Steps;” adding, “that if he
would not die for his Country, he would
not be worthy to live in it; I'd make no
more of shooting a Man that would not
die for his Country, than— 
“Sir,” said he, “I have disinherited
a Nephew who is in the Army, because
he would not exchange his Commission,
and go to the West-Indies. I believe
the Rascal is a Coward, tho' he pretends
to be in love forsooth. I would
have all such Fellows hanged, Sir, I 

would have them hanged.” Adams answered, “that would be too severe: 
That Men did not make themselves; and
if Fear had too much Ascendance in the
Mind, the Man was rather to be pitied
than abhorred: That Reason and Time
might teach him to subdue it.” “He said,
a Man might be a Coward at one time,
and brave at another. Homer,” says
he, “who so well understood and copied
Nature, hath taught us this Lesson: for
Paris fights, and Hector runs away: nay,
we have a mighty Instance of this in
the History of later Ages, no longer
ago, than the 705th Year of Rome, when
the Great Pompey, who had won so many
Battles, and been honoured with so
many Triumphs, and of whose Valour,
several Authors, especially Cicero and
Paterculus, have formed such Elogiums; 
this very Pompey left the Battle of Pharsalia
before he had lost it, and retreated
to his Tent, where he sat like the most
pusillanimous Rascal in a Fit of Despair,
and yielded a Victory, which was to determine
the Empire of the World, to
Cæsar. I am not much travelled in the
History of modern Times, that is to say,
these last thousand Years: but those who
are, can, I make no question, furnish you
with parallel Instances.” He concluded 

therefore, that had he taken any such hasty
Resolutions against his Nephew, he hoped
he would consider better and retract them. 
The Gentleman answered with great
Warmth, and talked much of Courage
and his Country, 'till perceiving it grew
late, he asked Adams, “what Place he
intended for that Night?” He told
him, “he waited there for the Stage-Coach.” 
“The Stage-Coach! Sir,” 
said the Gentleman, “they are all past by
long ago. You may see the last yourself,
almost three Miles before us.” “I
protest and so they are,” cries Adams,
then I must make haste and follow them.” 
The Gentleman told him, “he would
hardly be able to overtake them; and
that if he did not know his Way, he
would be in danger of losing himself
on the Downs; for it would be presently
dark; and he might ramble about all Night,
and perhaps, find himself farther from
his Journey's End in the Morning than
he was now. He advised him therefore
to accompany him to his House,
which was very little out of his way,” 
assuring him, “that he would find some
Country-Fellow in his Parish, who would
conduct him for Sixpence to the City,
where he was going.” Adams accepted
this Proposal, and on they travelled, the 

Gentleman renewing his Discourse on Courage,
and the Infamy of not being ready
at all times to sacrifice our Lives to our
Country. Night overtook them much about
the same time as they arrived near
some Bushes: whence, on a sudden, they
heard the most violent Shrieks imaginable
in a female Voice. Adams offered to snatch
the Gun out of his Companion's Hand. 
“What are you doing?” said he. “Doing!” 
says Adams, “I am hastening to
the Assistance of the poor Creature whom
some Villains are murdering.” “You
are not mad enough, I hope,” says the
Gentleman, trembling: “Do you consider
this Gun is only charged with Shot, and
that the Robbers are most probably furnished
with Pistols loaded with Bullets. 
This is no Business of ours; let us make as
much haste as possible out of the way,
or we may fall into their hands ourselves.” 
The Shrieks now encreasing,
Adams made no Answer, but snapt his
Fingers, and brandishing his Crabstick,
made directly to the Place whence the
Voice issued; and the Man of Courage
made as much Expedition towards his own
Home, whither he escaped in a very short
time without once looking behind him:
where we will leave him, to contemplate his
own Bravery, and to censure the want of it 

in others; and return to the good Adams,
who, on coming up to the Place whence
the Noise proceeded, found a Woman
struggling with a Man, who had thrown
her on the Ground, and had almost overpowered
her. The great Abilities of Mr.
Adams were not necessary to have formed
a right Judgment of this Affair, on the
first sight. He did not therefore want the
Entreaties of the poor Wretch to assist
her, but lifting up his Crabstick, he immediately
levelled a Blow at that Part of
the Ravisher's Head, where, according to
the Opinion of the Ancients, the Brains
of some Persons are deposited, and which
he had undoubtedly let forth, had not Nature,
(who, as wise Men have observed,
equips all Creatures with what is most expedient
for them;) taken a provident Care,
(as she always doth with those she intends
for Encounters) to make this part of the
Head three times as thick as those of ordinary
Men, who are designed to exercise
Talents which are vulgarly called rational,
and for whom, as Brains are necessary, she is
obliged to leave some room for them in the
Cavity of the Skull: whereas, those Ingredients
being entirely useless to Persons of
the heroic Calling, she hath an Opportunity
of thickening the Bone, so as to make it
less subject to any Impression or liable to be 

cracked or broken; and indeed, in some
who are predestined to the Command of
Armies and Empires, she is supposed sometimes
to make that Part perfectly solid. 
As a Game-Cock when engaged in amorous
Toying with a Hen, if perchance
he espies another Cock at hand, immediately
quits his Female, and opposes himself
to his Rival; so did the Ravisher, on the
Information of the Crabstick, immediately
leap from the Woman, and hastened to
assail the Man. He had no Weapons but
what Nature had furnished him with
However, he clenched his Fist, and presently
darted it at that Part of Adam's Breast
where the Heart is lodged. Adams staggered
at the Violence of the Blow, when
throwing away his Staff, he likewise clenched
that Fist which we have before commemorated,
and would have discharged it
full in the Breast of his Antagonist, had
he not dexterously caught it with his left
Hand, at the same time darting his Head; 
(which some modern Heroes, of the lower
Class, use like the Battering-Ram of the
Ancients, for a Weapon of Offence; another
Reason to admire the Cunningness of
Nature, in composing it of those impenetrable
Materials) dashing his Head, I say; 
into the Stomach of Adams, he tumbled 

him on his Back, and not having any regard
to the Laws of Heroism, which would
have restrained him from any farther Attack
on his Enemy, 'till he was again on
his Legs, he threw himself upon him, and
laying hold on the Ground with his left
Hand, he with his right belaboured the
Body of Adams 'till he was weary, and indeed,
'till he concluded (to use the Language
of fighting) that he had done his
Business; or, in the Language of Poetry,
that he had sent him to the Shades below; 
in plain English, that he was dead. 
But Adams, who was no Chicken, and
could bear a drubbing as well as any boxing
Champion in the Universe, lay still
only to watch his Opportunity; and now
perceiving his Antagonist to pant with his
Labours, he exerted his utmost Force at
once, and with such Success, that he overturned
him and became his Superiour; when
fixing one of his Knees in his Breast, he cried
out in an exulting Voice, It is my turn now:
and after a few Minutes constant Application,
he gave him so dextrous a Blow
just under his Chin, that the Fellow no
longer retained any Motion, and Adams
began to fear he had struck him once too
often; for he often asserted, “he should 

be concerned to have the Blood of even
the Wicked upon him.” 
Adams got up, and called aloud to the
young Woman,—“Be of good cheer,
Damsel, said he, you are no longer in
danger of your Ravisher, who, I am
terribly afraid, lies dead at my Feet; 
but G&wblank; forgive me what I have done
in Defence of Innocence.” The poor
Wretch, who had been some time in recovering
Strength enough to rise, and had
afterwards, during the Engagement, stood
trembling, being disabled by Fear, even
from running away, hearing her Champion
was victorious, came up to him, but not
without Apprehensions, even of her Deliverer; 
which, however, she was soon relieved
from, by his courteous Behaviour and
gentle Words. They were both standing
by the Body, which lay motionless on the
Ground, and which Adams wished to see
stir much more than the Woman did, when
he earnestly begged her to tell him “by
what Misfortune she came, at such a time
of Night, into so lonely a Place?” 
She acquainted him, “she was travelling
towards London, and had accidentally
met with the Person from whom he
had delivered her, who told her he was
likewise on his Journey to the same 

Place, and would keep her Company; 
an Offer which, suspecting no harm, she
had accepted; that he told her, they
were at a small distance from an Inn
where she might take up her Lodging
that Evening, and he would show her a
nearer way to it than by following the
Road. That if she had suspected him,
(which she did not, he spoke so kindly to
her,) being alone on these Downs in the
dark, she had no human Means to avoid
him; that therefore she put her whole
Trust in Providence, and walk'd on, expecting
every Moment to arrive at the
Inn; when, on a sudden, being come to
those Bushes, he desired her to stop, and
after some rude Kisses, which she resisted,
and some Entreaties, which she
rejected, he laid violent hands on her,
and was attempting to execute his wicked
Will, when, she thanked G&wblank;, he
timely came up and prevented him.” 
Adams encouraged her for saying, she
had put her whole Trust in Providence,
and told her “He doubted not but Providence
had sent him to her Deliverance,
as a Reward for that Trust. He wished
indeed he had not deprived the wicked
Wretch of Life, but G&wblank;'s Will be done; 
he said, he hoped the Goodness of his
Intention would excuse him in the next 

World, and he trusted in her Evidence
to acquit him in this.” He was then silent,
and began to consider with himself,
whether it would be properer to make his
Escape, or to deliver himself into the hands
of Justice; which Meditation ended, as the
Reader will see in the next Chapter. 



Giving an Account of the strange Catastrophe
of the preceding Adventure,
which drew poor Adams into fresh
Calamities; and who the Woman was
who owed the Preservation of her
Chastity to his victorious Arm. 
Whilst Adams was wisely weighing
in his Mind the Objections which
might be made to either of these two Methods
of proceeding, his Judgment sometimes
inclining to the one and sometimes to the
other; for both seemed to him so equally adviseable,
and so equally dangerous, that probably
he would have ended his Days, at
least two or three of them, on that very
Spot, before he had taken any Resolution; 
he lifted up his Eyes, and spied a Light at 

a distance, to which he instantly addressed
himself with Heus tu, Traveller, heus tu! 
He presently heard several Voices, and perceived
the Light approaching toward him. 
The Persons who attended the Light began
some to laugh, others to sing, and
others to hollow, at which the Woman
testified some Fear, but Adams said, “Be
of good cheer, Damsel, and repose thy
Trust in the same Providence, which
hath hitherto protected thee, and never
will forsake the Innocent.” These People
who now approached were no other,
Reader, than a Set of young Fellows, who
came to these Bushes in pursuit of a Diversion
which they call Bird-batting. This,
if thou art ignorant of it (as perhaps if thou
hast never travelled beyond Kensington, Islington,
Hackney, or the Borough, thou
mayst be) I will inform thee, is performed
by holding a large Clap-Net before a Lanthorn,
and at the same time, beating the
Bushes: for the Birds, when they are disturbed
from their Places of Rest, or
Roost, immediately make to the Light,
and so are enticed within the Net. Adams
immediately told them, what had
happened, and desired them, “to hold
the Lanthorn to the Face of the Man on
the ground, for he feared he had smote
him fatally.” But indeed his Fears were frivolous, 

for the Fellow, though he had been
stunned by the last Blow he received, had
long since recovered his Senses, and finding
himself quit of Adams, had listened attentively
to the Discourse between him and
the young Woman; for whose Departure
he had patiently waited, that he might
likewise withdraw himself, having no longer
Hopes of succeeding in his Desires,
which were moreover almost as well cooled
by Mr. Adams, as they could have
been by the young Woman herself, had
he obtained his utmost Wish. This Fellow,
who had a Readiness at improving
any Accident, thought he might now play
a better part than that of a dead Man; and
accordingly, the moment the Candle was
held to his Face, he leapt up, and laying
hold on Adams, cried out, “No, Villain,
I am not dead, though you and your
wicked Whore might well think me so,
after the barbarous Cruelties you have
exercised on me. Gentlemen,” said
he, “you are luckily come to the Assistance
of a poor Traveller, who would
otherwise have been robbed and murdered
by this vile Man and Woman,
who led me hither out of my way from
the High-Road, and both falling on
me have used me as you see.” Adams
was going to answer, when one of the 

young Fellows, cry'd, “D&wblank;n them, let's
carry them both before the Justice.” 
The poor woman began to tremble, and
Adams lifted up his Voice, but in vain. 
Three or four of them laid hands on him,
and one holding the Lanthorn to his Face,
they all agreed, he had the most villainous
Countenance they ever beheld, and an Attorney's
Clerk who was of the Company
declared, he was sure he had remembered
him at the Bar. As to the Woman, her
Hair was dishevelled in the Struggle, and
her Nose had bled, so that they could not
perceive whether she was handsome or ugly:
but they said her Fright plainly discovered
her Guilt. And searching her Pockets, as
they did those of Adams for Money, which
the Fellow said he had lost, they found in
her Pocket a Purse with some Gold in it,
which abundantly convinced them, especially
as the Fellow offered to swear to it. 
Mr. Adams was found to have no more
than one Halfpenny about him. This the
Clerk said, “was a great Presumption
that he was an old Offender, by cunningly
giving all the Booty to the Woman.” 
To which all the rest readily assented. 
This Accident promising them better
Sport, than what they had proposed, they 

quitted their Intention of catching Birds,
and unanimously resolved to proceed to
the Justice with the Offenders. Being informed
what a desperate Fellow Adams was,
they tied his Hands behind him, and
having hid their Nets among the Bushes,
and the Lanthorn being carried before
them, they placed the two Prisoners in
their Front, and then began their March:
Adams not only submitting patiently to his
own Fate, but comforting and encouraging
his Companion under her Sufferings. 
Whilst they were on their way, the
Clerk informed the rest, that this Adventure
would prove a very beneficial one:
for that they would be all entitled to their
Proportions of 80l. for apprehending the
Robbers. This occasion'd a Contention
concerning the Parts which they had severally
born in taking them; one insisting,
“he ought to have the greatest Share, for
he had first laid his Hands on Adams;” 
another claiming a superiour Part for having
first held the Lanthorn to the Man's
Face, on the Ground, by which, he said,
“the whole was discovered.” The Clerk
claimed four fifths of the Reward, for
having proposed to search the Prisoners; 
and likewise the carrying them before
the Justice: he said indeed, “in strict 

Justice he ought to have the whole.” 
These Claims however they at last consented
to refer to a future Decision, but
seem'd all to agree that the Clerk was intitled
to a Moiety. They then debated what
Money should be allotted to the young
Fellow, who had been employed only in
holding the Nets. He very modestly said,
“that he did not apprehend any large
Proportion would fall to his share; but
hoped they would allow him something:
he desired them to consider, that they
had assigned their Nets to his Care, which
prevented him from being as forward
as any in laying hold of the Robbers,
(for so these innocent People were called;)
that if he had not occupied the
Nets, some other must; concluding however
that he should be contented with the
smallest Share imaginable, and should
think that rather their Bounty than his
Merit”. But they were all unanimous in
excluding him from any Part whatever,
the Clerk particularly swearing, “if they
gave him a Shilling, they might do what
they pleased with the rest; for he would
not concern himself with the Affair.” 
This Contention was so hot, and so totally
engaged the Attention of all the
Parties, that Attention of all the
Parties, that a dextrous nimble Thief, had
he been in Mr. Adams's situation, would 

have taken care to have given the Justice
no Trouble that Evening. Indeed it required
not the Art of a Shepherd to escape,
especially as the Darkness of the Night
would have so much befriended him: but
Adams trusted rather to his Innocence
than his Heels, and without thinking of
Flight, which was easy, or Resistance (which
was impossible, as there were six lusty young
Fellows, besides the Villain himself, present)
he walked with perfect Resignation the
way they thought proper to conduct him. 
Adams frequently vented himself in
Ejaculations during their Journey; at last
poor Joseph Andrews occurring to his Mind,
he could not refrain sighing forth his Name,
which being heard by his Companion in
Affliction, she cried, with some Vehemence,
“Sure I should know that Voice, you cannot
certainly, Sir, be Mr. Abraham
Adams?” “Indeed Damsel,” says he, “that is
my Name; there is something also in your
Voice, which persuades me I have heard
it before.” “La, Sir,” says she, “don't
you remember poor Fanny?” How
Fanny!” answered Adams, “indeed I
very well remember you; what can have
brought you hither.” “I have told you
Sir,” replied she, “I was travelling towards
London; but I thought you mentioned 

Joseph Andrews, pray what is
become of him?” “I left him, Child, this
Afternoon” said Adams, “in the Stage-Coach,
in his way towards our Parish, whither
he is going to see you.” “To see
me? “La, Sir,” answered Fanny, “sure
you jeer me; what should he be going
to see me for?” “Can you ask that,” replied
Adams? “I hope Fanny you are
not inconstant; I assure you he deserves
much better of you.” “La! Mr. Adams,” 
said she, “what is Mr. Joseph
to me? I am sure I never had any thing
to say to him, but as one Fellow-Servant
might to another.” “I am sorry
to hear this,” said Adams, “a vertuous
Passion for a young Man, is what
no Woman need be ashamed of. You
either do not tell me Truth, or you
are false to a very worthy Man.” Adams
then told her what had happened
at the Inn, to which she listened very attentively; 
and a Sigh often escaped from
her, notwithstanding her utmost Endeavours
to the contrary, nor could she prevent
herself from asking a thousand Questions,
which would have assured any one but
Adams, who never saw farther into People
than they desired to let him, of the Truth
of a Passion she endeavoured to conceal. 

Indeed the Fact was, that this poor
Girl having heard of Joseph's Misfortune
by some of the Servants belonging to
that Coach, which we have formerly mentioned
to have stopped at the Inn while
the poor Youth was confined to his Bed,
that instant abandoned the Cow she was
milking, and taking with her a little Bundle
of Clothes under her Arm, and all
the Money she was worth in her own
Purse, without consulting any one, immediately
set forward, in pursuit of One,
whom, notwithstanding her shyness to the
Parson, she loved with inexpressible Violence,
though with the purest and most delicate
Passion. This Shyness therefore, as we
trust it will recommend her Character to
all our Female Readers, and not greatly
surprize such of our Males as are well
acquainted with the younger part of the
other Sex, we shall not give our selves
any trouble to vindicate. 




What happened to them while before
the Justice. A Chapter very full
of Learning. 
Their Fellow-Travellers were so engaged
in the hot Dispute concerning
the Division of the Reward for apprehending
these innocent People, that they attended
very little to their Discourse. They were
now arrived at the Justice's House, and
sent one of his Servants in to acquaint his
Worship, that they had taken two Robbers,
and brought them before him. The
Justice, who was just returned from a Fox-Chace,
and had not yet finished his Dinner,
ordered them to carry the Prisoners
into the Stable, whither they were attended
by all the Servants in the House, and all
the People of the Neighbourhood, who
flock'd together to see them with as much
Curiosity as if there was something uncommon
to be seen, or that a Rogue did not
look like other People. 
The Justice being now in the height of
his Mirth and his Cups, bethought himself
of the Prisoners, and telling his Company 

he believed they should have good Sport
in their Examination, he ordered them
into his Presence. They had no sooner entered
the Room, than he began to revile
them, saying, “that Robberies on the
Highway were now grown so frequent,
that People could not sleep safely in
their Beds, and assured them they both
should be made Examples of at the ensuing
Assizes.” After he had gone on
some time in this manner, he was reminded
by!by his Clerk, “that it would be proper
to take the Deposition of the Witnesses
against them.” Which he bid
him do, and he would light his Pipe in
the mean time. Whilst the Clerk was employed
in writing down the Depositions
of the Fellow who had pretended to be
robbed, the Justice employed himself in
cracking Jests on poor Fanny, in which
he was seconded by all the Company at
Table. One asked, “whether she was to
be indicted for a Highwayman?” Another
whispered in her Ear, “if she had
not provided herself a great Belly, he
was at her service.” A third said, “he
warranted she was a Relation of Turpis.” 
To which one of the Company,
a great Wit, shaking his Head and then
his Sides, answered, “he believed she was
nearer related to Turpis;” at which there 

was an universal Laugh. They were proceeding
thus with the poor Girl, when
somebody smoaking the Cassock, peeping
forth from under the Great Coat of Adams,
cried out, “What have we here,
a Parson?” “How, Sirrah,” says the
Justice, “do you go a robbing in the
Dress of a Clergyman? let me tell you,
your Habit will not entitle you to the
Benefit of the Clergy.” “Yes,” said the
witty Fellow, “he will have one Benefit of
Clergy, he will be exalted above the
Heads of the People,” at which there
was a second Laugh. And now the
witty Spark, seeing his Jokes take, began
to rise in Spirits; and turning to Adams,
challenged him to cap Verses, and provoking
him by giving the first Blow, he
repeated, 

Molle meum levibus cord est vilebile Telis. 
Upon which Adams, with a Look full of
ineffable Contempt, told him, he deserved
scourging for his Pronuntiation. The
witty Fellow answered, “What do you
deserve, Doctor, for not being able to
answer the first time?” Why I'll give
you one you Blockhead—with an S? 

Si licet, ut fulvum spectatur in igdibus haurum.

What can'st not with an M neither? 
Thou art a pretty Fellow for a Parson—. 
Why did'st not steal some of the Parson's
Latin as well as his Gown. Another at
the Table then answered, “if he had,
you would have been too hard for him; 
I remember you at the College a very
Devil at this Sport, I have seen you
catch a fresh Man: for no body that
knew you, would engage with you.” 
“I have forgot those things now,” cried
the Wit, “I believe I could have done
pretty well formerly. —Let's see, what
did I end with—an M again—ay— 
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.
“I could have done it once.” —Ah! evil
betide you, and so you can now,” 
said the other, “no body in this County
will undertake you.” Adams could
hold no longer; “Friend,” said he,
“I have a Boy not above eight Years old,
who would instruct thee, that the last
Verse runs thus: 

Ut sunt Divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.
“I'll hold thee a Guinea of that,” said
the Wit, throwing the Money on the
Table. —“And I'll go your halves,” 
cries the other.” “Done,” answered 

Adams, but upon applying to his Pocket,
he was forced to retract, and own he had
no Money about him; which set them all
a laughing, and confirmed the Triumph
of his Adversary, which was not moderate,
any more than the Approbation
he met with from the whole Company,
who told Adams he must go a little longer
to School, before he attempted to attack
that Gentleman in Latin. 
The Clerk having finished the Depositions,
as well of the Fellow himself, as of those
who apprehended the Prisoners, delivered
them to the Justice; who having sworn the
several Witnesses, without reading a Syllable,
ordered his Clerk to make the Mittimus. 
Adams then said, “he hoped he
should not be condemned unheard.” 
“No, no,” cries the Justice, “you will be
asked what you have to say for your
self, when you come on your Trial,
we are not trying you now; I shall only
commit you to Goal: if you can prove
your Innocence at Size, you will be found
Ignoramus, and so no Harm done.” 
“Is it no Punishment, Sir, for an innocent
Man to lie several Months in
Goal?” cries Adams: I beg you would
at least hear me before you sign the
Mittimus.” “What signifies all you 

can say,”? says the Justice, “is it not
here in black and white against you? 
I must tell you, you are a very impertinent
Fellow, to take up so much of
my time. —So make haste with his
Mittimus.” 
One of the Company having looked
stedfastly at Adams, asked him, “if he
did not know Lady Booby?” Upon
which Adams presently calling him to mind,
answered in a Rapture, “O Squire, are
you there? I believe you will inform his
Worship I am innocent.” “I can indeed
say,” replied the Squire, “that
I am very much surprized to see you
in this Situation;” and then addressing
himself to the Justice, he said, “Sir, I
assure you Mr. Adams is a Clergyman as
he appears, and a Gentleman of a very
good Character. I wish you would enquire
a little farther into this Affair:
for I am convinced of his Innocence.” 
“Nay,” says the Justice, “if he is a Gentleman,
and you are sure he is innocent,
I don't desire to commit him, not I; 
I will commit the Woman by herself,
and take your Bail for the Gentleman; 
look into the Book, Clerk, and see how
it is to take Bail; come—and make the
Mittimus for the Woman as fast as you 

can.” “Sir,” cries Adams, “I assure
you she is as innocent as myself.” “Perhaps,” 
said the Squire, “there may be
some Mistake; pray let us hear Mr. Adams's
Relation.” “With all my heart,” 
answered the Justice, “and give the Gentleman
a Glass to whet his Whistle before
he begins. I know how to behave
myself to Gentlemen as well as another. 
No body can say I have committed a
Gentleman since I have been in the
Commission.” Adams then began the
Narrative, in which, though he was very
prolix, he was uninterrupted too, unless by
several Hums and Ha's of the Justice, and
his Desire to repeat those Parts which
seemed to him most material. When he
had finished; the Justice, who, on what
the Squire had said, believed every Syllable
of his Story on his bare Affirmation,
notwithstanding the Depositions
on Oath to the contrary, began to let
loose several Rogues and Rascals against
the Witness, whom he ordered to stand
forth, but in vain: the said Witness, long
since finding what turn Matters were
like to take, had privily withdrawn, without
attending the Issue. The Justice now
flew into a violent Passion, and was hardly
prevailed with not to commit the innocent
Fellows, who had been imposed on 

as well as himself. He swore, “they had
best find out the Fellow who was guilty
of Perjury, and bring him before him
within two Days; or he would bind them
all over to their good Behaviour.” They
all promised to use their best Endeavours
to that purpose, and were dismissed. Then
the Justice insisted, that Mr. Adams should
sit down and take a Glass with him. As for
Fanny, she was, at her own Request, recommended
to the Care of a Maid-Servant
of the House, who helped her to new
dress, and clean herself. 
The Company in the Parlour had not
been long seated, before they were alarmed
with a horrible Uproar from without, where
the Persons who had apprehended Adams
and Fanny, had been regaling, according to
the Custom of the House, with the Justice's
Strong Beer. These were all fallen
together by the Ears, and were cuffing
each other without any Mercy. The Justice
himself sallied out, and with the Dignity
of his Presence, soon put an end to the
Fray. On his return into the Parlour, he reported,
That the Occasion of the Quarrel,
was no other than a Dispute, to whom, if
dams had been convicted, the greater Share
of the Reward for apprehending him had
belonged.” All the Company laughed at 

this, except Adams, who taking his Pipe
from his Mouth fetched a deep Groan,
and said, he was concerned to see so litigious
a Temper in Men. That he remembered
a Story something like it in
one of the Parishes where his Cure lay:
“There was,” continued he, “a Competition
between three young Fellows, for
the Place of the Clerk, which I disposed
of, to the best of my Abilities, according
to Merit: that is, I gave it to him
who had the happiest Knack at setting a
Psalm. The Clerk was no sooner established
in his Place, than a Contention began between
the two disappointed Candidates,
concerning their Excellence, each contending,
they two only had been the Competitors
on whom my Election would have
fallen. This Dispute frequently disturbed
the Congregation, and introduced a Discord
into the Psalmody, 'till I was forced
to silence them both. But alas, the
litigious Spirit could not be stifled; and
being no longer able to vent itself in
singing, it now broke forth in fighting. 
It produced many Battles, (for they were
very near a Match;) and, I believe,
would have ended fatally, had not the
Death of the Clerk given me an Opportunity
to promote one of them to
his Place; which presently put an end 

to the Dispute, and entirely reconciled
the contending Parties.” Adams then
proceeded to make some Philosophical Observations
on the Folly of growing warm
in Disputes, in which neither Party is interested. 
He then applied himself vigorously
to smoaking; and a long Silence ensued,
which was at length broken by the
Justice; who began to sing forth his own
Praises, and to value himself exceedingly
on his nice Discernment in the Cause, which
had lately been before him. He was quickly
interrupted by Mr. Adams, between
whom and his Worship a Dispute now arose,
whether he ought not, in strictness
of Law, to have committed him, the
said Adams; in which the latter maintained
he ought to have been committed, and the
Justice as vehemently held he ought not. 
This had most probably produced a Quarrel,
(for both were very violent and positive
in their Opinions) had not Fanny accidentally
heard, that a young Fellow was
going from the Justice's House, to the
very Inn where the Stage-Coach in which
Joseph was, put up. Upon this News, she
immediately sent for the Parson out of the
Parlour. Adams, when he found her resolute
to go, (tho' she would not own the
Reason, but pretended she could not bear
to see the Faces of those who had suspected 

her of such a Crime,) was as fully determined
to go with her; he accordingly
took leave of the Justice and Company,
and so ended a Dispute, in which the Law
seemed shamefully to intend to set a Magistrate
and a Divine together by the
ears. 



A very delightful Adventure, as well to
the Parlour concerned as to the good-natur'd
Reader. 
Adams, Fanny, and the Guide set
out together, about one in the Morning,
the Moon then just being risen. They
had not gone above a Mile, before a most
violent Storm of Rain obliged them to take
shelter in an Inn, or rather Alehouse; 
where Adams immediately procured himself
a good Fire, a Toast and Ale, and a
Pipe, and began to smoke with great Content,
utterly forgetting every thing that
had happened. 
Fanny sat likewise down by the Fire; 
but was much more impatient at the Storm. 
She presently engaged the Eyes of the 

Host, his Wife, the Maid of the House,
and the young Fellow who was their
Guide; they all conceived they had never
seen any thing half so handsome; and indeed,
Reader, if thou art of an amorous
Hue, I advise thee to skip over the next
Paragraph; which to render our History
perfect, we are obliged to set down, humbly
hoping, that we may escape the Fate
of Pygmalion: for if it should happen to
us or to thee to be struck with this Picture,
we should be perhaps in as helpless a Condition
as Narcissus; and might say to ourselves,
Quod petis est nusquam. Or if the
finest Features in it should set a Lady&wblank;'s
Image before our Eyes, we should be still
in as bad Situation, and might say to our
Desires, Cælum ipsum petimus stultitia. 
Fanny was now in the nineteenth Year
of her Age; she was tall and delicately
shaped; but not one of those slender young
Women, who seem rather intended to
hang up in the Hall of an Anatomist,
than for any other Purpose. On the contrary,
she was so plump, that she seemed
bursting through her tight Stays, especially
in the Part which confined her swelling
Breasts. Nor did her Hips want the Assistance
of a Hoop to extend them. The
exact Shape of her Arms, denoted the 

Form of those Limbs which she concealed; 
and tho' they were a little redden'd by
her Labour, yet if her Sleeve slipt above
her Elbow, or her Handkerchief discovered
any part of her Neck, a Whiteness appeared
which the finest Italian Paint would
be unable to reach. Her Hair was of a
Chesnut Brown, and Nature had been extremely
lavish to her of it, which she had
cut, and on Sundays used to curl down her
Neck in the modern Fashion. Her Forehead
was high, her Eye-brows arched, and
rather full than otherwise. Her Eyes black
and sparkling; her Nose, just inclining to
the Roman; her Lips red and moist, and
her Under-Lip, according to the Opinion of
the Ladies, too pouting. Her Teeth were
white, but not exactly even. The Small-Pox
had left one only Mark on her Chin,
which was so large, it might have been mistaken
for a Dimple, had not her left
Cheek produced one so near a Neighbour
to it, that the former served only for a
Foil to the latter. Her Complexion was
fair, a little injured by the Sun, but overspread
with such a Bloom, that the finest
Ladies would have exchanged all their
White for it: add to these, a Countenance
in which tho' she was extremely bashful, a
Sensibility appeared almost incredible; and
a Sweetness, whenever she smiled, beyond 

either Imitation or Description. To conclude
all, she had a natural Gentility, superior
to the Acquisition of Art, and which
surprized all who beheld her. 
This lovely Creature was sitting by the
Fire with Adams, when her Attention was
suddenly engaged by a Voice from an inner
Room, which sung the following Song: 

The SONG.
Say, Chloe, where must the Swain stray
 Who is by thy Beauties undone,
To wash their Remembrance away,
 To what distant Lethe must run?
The Wretch who is sentenc'd to die,
 May escape and leave Justice behind;
From his Country perhaps he may fly,
 But O can he fly from his Mind!
O Rapture! unthought of before,
 To be thus of Chloe possest;
Nor she, nor no Tyrant's hard Power,
 Her Image can tear from my Breast.
But felt not Narcissus more Joy,
 With his Eyes be beheld his lov'd Charms?
Yet what he beheld, the fond Boy
 More eagerly wish'd in his Arms.

How can it thy dear Image be,
 Which fills thus my Bosom with Woe?
Can aught bear Resemblance to thee,
 Which Grief and not Joy can bestow?
This Counterfeit snatch from my Heart,
 Ye Pow'rs, tho' with Torment I rave,
Tho' mortal will prove the fell Smart,
 I then shall find rest in my Grave.
Ah! see, the dear Nymph o'er the Plain,
 Comes smiling and tripping along,
A thousand Loves dance in her Train,
 The Graces around her all throng.
To meet her soft Zephyrus flies,
 And wafts all the Sweets from the Flow'rs
Ah Rogue! whilst he kisses her Eyes,
 More Sweets from her Breath he devours.
My Soul, whilst I gaze, is on fire,
 But her Looks were so tender and kind,
My Hope almost reach'd my Desire,
 And left lame Despair far behind.
Transported with Madness I flew,
 And eagerly seiz'd on my Bliss;
Her Bosom but half she withdrew,
 But half she refus'd my fond Kiss.
Advances like these made me bold,
 I whisper'd her, Love,—we're alone,
The rest let Immortals unfold,
 No Language can tell but their own.

Ah! Chloe, expiring, I cry'd,
 How long I thy Cruelty bore?
Ah! Strephon, she blushing reply'd,
 You ne'er was so pressing before.
Adams had been ruminating all this
Time on a Passage in Æschylus, without
attending in the least to the
Voice, tho' one of the most melodious
that ever was heard; when casting his
Eyes on Fanny, he cried out, “Bless us,
you look extremely pale.” Pale! Mr. Adams,
says she, O Jesus! and fell backwards
in her Chair. Adams jumped up, flung
his Æschylus into the Fire, and fell a roaring
to the People of the House for Help. 
He soon summoned every one into the
Room, and the Songster among the rest:
But, O Reader, when this Nightingale,
who was no other than Joseph Andrews
himself, saw his beloved Fanny in the Situation
we have described her, can'st thou
conceive the Agitations of his Mind? If
thou can'st not, wave that Meditation to
behold his Happiness, when clasping her in
his Arms, he found Life and Blood returning
into her Cheeks; when he saw her
open her beloved Eyes, and heard her with
the softest Accent whisper, “Are you Joseph
Andrews?” “Art thou my Fanny?” 
he answered eagerly, and pulling her to 

his Heart, he imprinted numberless Kisses
on her Lips, without considering who were
present. 
If Prudes are offended at the Lusciousness
of this Picture, they may take their
Eyes off from it, and survey Parson Adams
dancing about the Room in a Rapture of
Joy. Some Philosophers may perhaps
doubt, whether he was not the happiest of
the three; for the Goodness of his Heart
enjoyed the Blessings which were exulting
in the Breasts of both the other two, together
with his own. But we shall leave such
Disquisitions as too deep for us, to those
who are building some favourite Hypotheses,
which they will refuse no Metaphysical
Rubbish to erect, and support: for our
part, we give it clearly on the side of Joseph,
whose Happiness was not only greater
than the Parson's, but of longer Duration:
for as soon as the first Tumults of Adams's
Rapture were over, he cast his Eyes towards
the Fire, where Æschylus lay expiring; 
and immediately rescued the poor Remains,
to-wit, the Sheep-skin Covering of his dear
Friend, who had been his inseparable Companion
for upwards of thirty Years. 
Fanny had no sooner perfectly recovered
herself, than she began to restrain the Impetuosity 

of her Transports; and reflecting on
what she had done and suffered in the Presence
of so many, she was immediately covered
with Confusion; and pushing Joseph gently
from her, she begged him to be quiet:
nor would admit of either Kiss or Embrace
any longer. Then seeing Mrs. Slipslop
she curt'sied, and offered to advance to
her; but that high Woman would not return
her Curt'sies; but casting her Eyes another
way, she immediately withdrew into
another Room, muttering as she went,
she wondered who the Creature was. 



A Dissertation concerning high People
and low People, with Mrs. Slipslop's
Departure in no very good Temper of
Mind, and the evil Plight in which
she left Adams and his Company. 
It will doubtless seem extremely odd to
many Readers, that Mrs. Slipslop, who
had lived several Years in the same House
with Fanny, should in a short Separation
utterly forget her. And indeed the truth
is, that she remembered her very well. 
As we would not willingly therefore, that 

any thing should appear unnatural in this
our History, we will endeavour to explain
the Reasons of this her Conduct; nor do
we doubt being able to satisfy the most
curious Reader, that Mrs. Slipslop did not
in the least deviate from the common
Road in this Behaviour; and indeed, had
she done otherwise, she must have descended
below herself, and would have very justly
been liable to Censure. 
Be it known then, that the human Species
are divided into two sorts of People,
to-wit, High People and Low People. As
by High People, I would not be understood
to mean Persons literally born higher
in their Dimensions than the rest of the
Species, nor metaphorically those of exalted
Characters or Abilities; so by low People
I cannot be construed to intend the Reverse. 
High People signify no other than
People of Fashion, and low People those
of no Fashion. Now this word Fashion,
hath by long use lost its original
Meaning, from which at present it gives
us a very different Idea: for I am deceived,
if by Persons of Fashion, we do not
generally include a Conception of Birth and
Accomplishments superior to the Herd of
Mankind; whereas in reality, nothing more
was originally meant by a Person of Fashion, 

than a Person who drest himself in
the Fashion of the Times; and the Word
really and truly signifies no more at this
day. Now the World being thus divided
into People of Fashion, and People of no
Fashion, a fierce Contention arose between
them, nor would those of one Party, to
avoid Suspicion, be seen publickly to speak
to those of the other; tho' they; often
held a very good Correspondence in private. 
In this Contention, it is difficult to say
which Party succeeded: for whilst the People
of Fashion seized several Places to their
own use, such as Courts, Assemblies, Operas,
Balls, &c. the People of no Fashion,
besides one Royal Place called his
Majesty's Bear-Garden, have been in constant
Possession of all Hops, Fairs, Revels,
&c. Two Places have been agreed
to be divided between them, namely the
Church and the Play-House; where they
segregate themselves from each other in a
remarkable Manner: for as the People of
Fashion exalt themselves at Church over the
Heads of the People of no Fashion; so in
the Play-House they abase themselves in
the same degree under their Feet. This
Distinction I have never met with any one
able to account for; it is sufficient, that so
far from looking on each other as Brethren
in the Christian Language, they seem scarce 

to regard each other as of the same Species. 
This the Terms strange Persons, People
one does not know, the Creature, Wretches,
Beasts, Brutes, and many other Appellations
evidently demonstrate; which
Mrs. Slipslop having often heard her Mistress
use, thought she had also a Right to
use in her turn: and perhaps she was not
mistaken; for these two Parties, especially
those bordering nearly on each other, to-wit
the lowest of the High, and the highest of
the Low, often change their Parties according
to Place and Time; for those who are
People of Fashion in one place, are often
People of no Fashion in another: And with
regard to Time, it may not be unpleasant
to survey the Picture of Dependance like a
kind of Ladder; as for instance, early in
the Morning arises the Postillion, or some
other Boy which great Families no more
than great Ships are without, and falls to
brushing the Clothes, and cleaning the
Shoes of John the Footman, who being
drest himself, applies his Hands to the same
Labours for Mr. Second-hand the Squire's
Gentleman; the Gentleman in the like
manner, a little later in the Day, attends
the Squire; the Squire is no sooner equipped,
than he attends the Levee of my
Lord; which is no sooner over, than my
Lord himself is seen at the Levee of the 

Favourite, who after his Hour of Homage
is at an end, appears himself to pay Homage
to the Levee of his Sovereign. Nor
is there perhaps, in this whole Ladder of
Dependance, any one Step at a greater
distance from the other, than the
first from the second: so that to a Philosopher
the Question might only seem whether
you would chuse to be a great Man at
six in the Morning, or at twelve. And yet
there are scarce two of these, who do not
think the least Familiarity with the Persons
below them a Condescension, and if they
were to go one Step farther, a Degradation. 
And now, Reader, I hope thou wilt
pardon this long Digression, which seemed
to me necessary to vindicate the great Character
of Mrs. Slipslop, from what low People,
who have never seen high People might
think an Absurdity: but we who know
them, must have daily found very high
Persons know us in one Place and not in
another, To-day, and not To-morrow; 
for all which, it is difficult to account for,
otherwise than I have here endeavour'd; and
perhaps, if the Gods, according to the Opinion
of some, made Men only to laugh
at them, there is no part of our Behaviour
which answers the End of our Creation
better than this. 

But to return to our History: Adams,
who knew no more of all this than the Cat
which sat on the Table, imagining Mrs.
Slipslop's Memory had been much worse
than it really was, followed her into the
next Room, crying out, “Madam Slipslop,
here is one of your old Acquaintance: 
Do but see what a fine Woman she is
grown since she left Lady Booby's Service.” 
“I think I reflect something of
her,” answered she with great Dignity,
“but I can't remember all the inferior
Servants in our Family.” She then proceeded
to satisfy Adams's Curiosity, by telling
him, “when she arrived at the Inn, she
found a Chaise ready for her; that her
Lady being expected very shortly in the
Country, she was obliged to make the
utmost haste, and in Commensuration of
Joseph's Lameness, she had taken him
with her;” and lastly, “that the excessive
Violence of the Storm had driven them
into the House where he found them.” 
After which, she acquainted Adams with
his having left his Horse, and exprest some
Wonder at his having strayed so far out
of his Way, and at meeting him, as she
said, “in the Company of that Wench,
who she feared was no better than she
should be.” 

The Horse was no sooner put into Adams's
Head, but he was immediately driven
out by this Reflection on the Character
of Fanny. He protested, “he believed
there was not a chaster Damsel in the Universe. 
I heartily wish, I heartily wish,” 
cry'd he, (snapping his Fingers) “that all
her Betters were as good.” He then
proceeded to inform her of the Accident
of their meeting; but when he came to
mention the Circumstance of delivering
her from the Rape, she said, “she thought
him properer for the Army than the
Clergy: that it did not become a Clergyman
to lay violent Hands on any one,
that he should have rather prayed that
she might be strengthened.” Adams said,
“he was very far from being ashamed of
what he had done;” she replied, “want
of Shame was not the Currycuristick of a
Clergyman.” This Dialogue might
have probably grown warmer, had not Joseph
opportunely entered the Room, to
ask leave of Madam Slipslop to introduce
Fanny: but she positively refused to admit
any such Trollops; and told him,
“she would have been burnt before she
would have suffered him to get into a
Chaise with her; if she had once respected
him of having his Sluts way laid on 

the Road for him,” adding, “that
Mr. Adams acted a very pretty Part,
and she did not doubt but to see him a
Bishop.” He made the best Bow he
could, and cried out, “I thank you, Madam,
for that Right Reverend Appellation,
which I shall take all honest Means
to deserve.” “Very honest Means,” returned
she with a Sneer, “to bring good
People together.” At these Words,
Adams took two or three Strides a-cross the
Room, when the Coachman came to inform
Mrs. Slipslop, “that the Storm was
over, and the Moon shone very bright.” 
She then sent for Joseph, who was sitting
without with his Fanny; and would have
had him gone with her: but he peremptorily
refused to leave Fanny behind; 
which threw the good Woman into a violent
Rage. She said, “she would inform
her Lady what Doings were carrying on,
and did not doubt, but she would rid
the Parish of all such People;” and concluded
a long Speech full of Bitterness and
very hard Words, with some Reflections
on the Clergy, not decent to repeat: at last
finding Joseph unmoveable, she flung herself
into the Chaise, casting a Look at Fanny
as she went, not unlike that which Cleopatra
gives Octavia in the Play. To say
the truth, she was most disagreeably disappointed 

by the Presence of Fanny; she
had from her first seeing Joseph at the Inn,
conceived Hopes of something which
might have been accomplished at an Alehouse
as well as a Palace; indeed it is probable,
Mr. Adams had rescued more than
Fanny from the Danger of a Rape that
Evening. 
When the Chaise had carried off the
enraged Slipslop; Adams, Joseph, and Fanny
assembled over the Fire; where they
had a great deal of innocent Chat, pretty
enough; but as possibly, it would not be
very entertaining to the Reader, we shall
hasten to the Morning; only observing
that none of them went to bed that Night. 
Adams, when he had smoked three Pipes,
took a comfortable Nap in a great Chair, and
left the Lovers, whose Eyes were too well
employed to permit any Desire of shutting
them, to enjoy by themselves during some
Hours, an Happiness which none of my
Readers, who have never been in love, are
capable of the least Conception of, tho'
we had as many Tongues as Homer had to
describe it with, and which all true Lovers
will represent to their own Minds without
the least Assistance from us. 

Let it suffice then to say, that Fanny
after a thousand Entreaties at last gave up
her whole Soul to Joseph, and almost
fainting in his Arms, with a Sigh infinitely
softer and sweeter too, than any Arabian
Breeze, she whispered to his Lips, which
were then close to hers, “O Joseph, you
have won me; I will be yours for
ever.” Joseph, having thanked her on his
Knees, and embraced her with an Eagerness,
which she now almost returned, leapt
up in a Rapture, and awakened the Parson,
earnestly begging him, “that he
would that Instant join their Hands together.” 
Adams rebuked him for his
Request, and told him, “he would by
no means consent to any thing contrary
to the Forms of the Church, that he
had no Licence, nor indeed would he
advise him to obtain one. That the
Church had prescribed a Form, namely
the Publication of Banns, with which
all good Christians ought to comply,
and to the Omission of which, he attributed
the many Miseries which befel
great Folks in Marriage; concluding,
As many as are joined together otherwise
than G&wblank;'s Word doth allow, are not
joined together by G&wblank;, neither is their Matrimony
lawful.” Fanny agreed with the 

Parson saying to Joseph with a Blush, “she
assured him she would not consent to any
such thing, and that she wondred at his
offering it.” In which Resolution she was
comforted, and commended by Adams; and
Joseph was obliged to wait patiently till
after the third Publication of the Banns,
which however, he obtained the Consent
of Fanny in the presence of Adams to put
in at their Arrival. 
The Sun had been now risen some Hours,
when Joseph finding his Leg surprisingly
recovered, proposed to walk forwards; 
but when they were all ready to set out,
an Accident a little retarded them. This
was no other than the Reckoning which
amounted to seven Shillings; no great
Sum, if we consider the immense Quantity
of Ale which Mr. Adams poured in. Indeed
they had no Objection to the Reasonableness
of the Bill, but many to the
Probability of paying it; for the Fellow
who had taken poor Fanny's Purse, had
unluckily forgot to return it. So that the
Account stood thus: 

Mr. Adams and Company Dr.070
In Mr. Adams's Pocket,006 ½
In Mr. Joseph's,000
In Mrs. Fanny's,000
Balance065 ½

They stood silent some few Minutes,
staring at each other, when Adams whipt
out on his Toes, and asked the Hostess
“if there was no Clergyman in that Paris?” 
She answered, “there was.” “Is
he wealthy?” replied he, to which she
likewise answered in the Affirmative. 
Adams then snapping his Fingers returned
overjoyed to his Companions, crying out,
“&grE;&gru;&grr;&grh;&grk;&gra;, &grE;&gru;&grr;&grh;&grk;&gra;,” which not being understood,
he told them in plain English “they
need give themselves no trouble; for he
had a Brother in the Parish, who would
defray the Reckoning, and that he
would just step to his House and fetch
the Money, and return to them instantly”. 



An Interview between Parson Adams and Parson Trulliber. 
Parson Adams came to the House of
Parson Trulliber, whom he sound
stript into his Waistcoat, with an Apron
on, and a Pail in his Hand, just come from
serving his Hogs; for Mr. Trulliber was
a Parson on Sundays, but all the other six 

might more properly be called a Farmer. 
He occupied a small piece of Land of his
own, besides which he rented a considerable
deal more. His Wife milked his
Cows, waited in his Dairy, and followed
the Markets with Butter and Eggs. The
Hogs fell chiefly to his care, which he
carefully waited on at home, and attended
to Fairs; on which occasion he was liable
to many Jokes, his own Size being with
much Ale rendered little inferiour to that
of the Beasts he sold. He was indeed one
of the largest Men you should see, and
could have acted the part of Sir John
Falstaff without stuffing. Add to this, that
the Rotundity of his Belly was considerably
increased by the shortness of his Stature,
his Shadow ascending very near as far
in height when he lay on his Back, as when
he stood on his Legs. His Voice was loud
and hoarse, and his Accents extremely
broad; to complete the whole, he had a
Stateliness in his Gate, when he walked,
not unlike that of a Goose, only slower. 
Mr. Trulliber being informed that somebody
wanted to speak with him, immediately
slipt off his Apron, and clothed
himself in an old Night-Gown, being the
Dress in which he always saw his Company
at home. His Wife who informed him of
Mr. Adams's Arrival, had made a small 

Mistake; for she had told her Husband,
“she believed he was a Man come for
some of his Hogs.” This Supposition
made Mr. Trulliber hasten with the utmost
expedition to attend his Guest; he no
sooner saw Adams, than not in the least
doubting the cause of his Errand to be
what his Wife had imagined, he told
him, “he was come in very good time; 
that he expected a Dealer that very Afternoon;” 
and added, “they were all
pure and fat, and upwards of 20 Score
a piece.” Adams answered, “he believed
he did not know him. Yes, yes,” 
cry'd Trulliber, “I have seen you often at
Fair; why, we have dealt before
now mun, I warrant you; yes, yes,” cries
he, “I remember thy Face very well, but
won't mention a word more till you have
seen them, tho' I have never sold thee
a Flitch of such Bacon as is now in the
Stye.” Upon which he laid violent
Hands on Adams, and dragged him into the
Hogs-Stye, which was indeed but two
Steps from his Parlour Window. They
were no sooner arrived there than he cry'd
out, “Do but handle them, step in, Friend,
art welcome to handle them whether
dost buy or no.” At which words opening
the Gate, he pushed Adams into the
Pig-Stye, insisting on it, that he should 

handle them, before he would talk one
word with him. Adams, whose natural
Complacence was beyond any artificial, was
obliged to comply before he was suffered
to explain himself, and laying hold on one
of their Tails, the unruly Beast gave such
a sudden spring, that he threw poor Adams
all along in the Mire. Trulliber instead
of assisting him to get up, burst into a
Laughter, and entering the Stye, said to
Adams with some contempt, Why, dost
not know how to handle a Hog: and was
going to lay hold of one himself; but
Adams, who thought he had carried his
Complacence far enough, was no sooner on
his Legs, than he escaped out of the Reach
of the Animals, and cry'd out, nihil habeo
cum Porcis: “I am a Clergyman, Sir,
and am not come to buy Hogs.” Trulliber
answered, “he was sorry for the
Mistake; but that he must blame his
Wife;” adding, “she was a Fool, and
always committed Blunders.” He then
desired him to walk in and clean himself,
that he would only fasten up the Stye and
follow him. Adams desired leave to dry
his Great Coat, Wig, and Hat by the Fire,
which Trulliber granted. Mrs. Trulliber
would have brought him a Bason of Water
to wash his Face, but her Husband bid her
be quiet like a Fool as she was or she would 

commit more Blunders, and then directed
Adams to the Pump. While Adams was
thus employed, Trulliber conceiving no
great Respect for the Appearance of his
Guest, fastened the Parlour-Door, and
now conducted him into the Kitchin; telling
him, he believed a Cup of Drink
would do him no harm, and whispered his
Wife to draw a little of the worst Cyder. 
After a short Silence, Adams said, “I fancy,
Sir, you already perceive me to be a Clergyman.” 
“Ay, ay,” cries Trulliber grinning; 
I perceive you have some Cassock; I
will not venture to call it a whole one.” 
Adams answered, “it was indeed none of
the best; but he had the misfortune to
tear it about ten Years ago in passing
over a Stile.” Mrs. Trulliber returning
with the Drink, told her Husband “she
fancied the Gentleman was a Traveller,
and that he would be glad to eat a bit.” 
Trulliber bid her “hold her impertinent
Tongue;” and asked her “if Parsons
used to travel without Horses? adding,
he supposed the Gentleman had none by
his having no Boots on.” “Yes, Sir, yes,” 
says Adams, “I have a Horse, but I have
left him behind me;” “I am glad to hear
you have one, says Trubiller; for I assure
you, I don't love to see Clergymen on
foot; it is not seemly nor suiting the 

Dignity of the Cloth.” Here Trulliber
made a long Oration on the Dignity of the
Cloth (or rather Gown) not much worth
relating, till his Wife had spread the Table
and set a Mess of Porridge on it for his
Breakfast. He then said to Adams, “I
don't know, Friend, how you came to call
on me; however, as you are here, if you
think proper to eat a Morsel, you may.” 
Adams accepted the Invitation, and the
two Parsons sat down together, Mrs. Trulliber
waiting behind her Husband's Chair,
as was, it seems, her custom. Trulliber
eat heartily, but scarce put any thing in his
Mouth without finding fault with his
Wife's Cookery. All which the poor
Woman bore patiently. Indeed she was
so absolute an Admirer of her Husband's
Greatness and Importance, of which she
had frequent Hints from his own Mouth,
that she almost carried her Adoration to
an opinion of his Infallibility. To say the
truth, the Parson had exercised her more
ways than one; and the pious Woman had
so well edified by her Husband's Sermons,
that she had resolved to receive the good
things of this World together with the
bad. She had indeed been at first a little
contentious; but he had long since got
the better, partly by her love for this,
partly by her fear of that, partly by her 

Religion, partly by the Respect he paid
himself, and partly by that which he received
from the Parish: She had, in short,
absolutely submitted, and now worshipped
her Husband as Sarah did Abraham, calling
him (not Lord but) Master. Whilst
they were at Table, her Husband gave her
a fresh Example of his Greatness; for as
she had just delivered a Cup of Ale to
Adams, he snatched it out of his Hand,
and crying out, I called vurst, swallowed
down the Ale. Adams denied it, and it was
referred to the Wife, who tho' her Conscience
was on the side of Adams, durst not
give it against her Husband. Upon
which he said, “No, Sir, no, I should not
have been so rude to have taken it from
you, if you had called vurst; but I'd
have you know I'm a better, Man than
to suffer the best He in the Kingdom to
drink before me in my own House,
when I call vurst.” 
As soon as their Breakfast was ended,
Adams began in the following manner: “I
think, Sir, it is high time to inform you
of the business of my Embassy. I am
a Traveller, and am passing this way in
company with two young People, a Lad
and a Damsel, my Parishioners, towards
my own Cure: we stopt at a 

House of Hospitality in the Parish,
where they directed me to you, as having
the Cure”—“Tho' I am but a Curate,” 
says Trulliber, “I believe I am as
warm as the Vicar himself, or perhaps
the Rector of the next Parish too; I believe
I could buy them both.” “Sir,” 
cries Adams, “I rejoice thereat. Now,
Sir, my Business is, that we are by various
Accidents stript of our Money,
and are not able to pay our Reckoning,
being seven Shillings. I therefore request
you to assist me with the Loan of
those seven Shillings, and also seven
Shillings more, which peradventure I
shall return to you; but if not, I am convinced
you will joyfully embrace such an
Opportunity of laying up a Treasure in a
better Place than any this World affords.” 
Suppose a Stranger, who entered the
Chambers of a Lawyer, being imagined a
Client, when the Lawyer was preparing
his Palm for the Fee, should pull out a
Writ against him. Suppose an Apothecary,
at the Door of a Chariot containing
some great Doctor of eminent Skill, should,
instead of Directions to a Patient, present
him with a Potion for himself. Suppose a
Minister should, instead of a good round
Sum, treat my Lord—or Sir—or
Esq;—with a good Broomstick.  Suppose 

a civil Companion, or a led Captain
should, instead of Virtue, and Honour,
and Beauty, and Parts, and Admiration,
thunder Vice and Infamy, and Ugliness,
and Folly, and Contempt, in his Patron's
Ears. Suppose when a Tradesman first
carries in his Bill, the Man of Fashion
should pay it; or suppose, if he did so,
the Tradesman should abate what he had
overcharged on the Supposition of waiting. 
In short—suppose what you will, you never
can nor will suppose any thing equal to the
Astonishment which seiz'd on Trulliber, as
soon as Adams had ended his Speech. A
while he rolled his Eyes in Silence, some
times surveying Adams, then his Wife,
then casting them on the Ground, then
lifting them to Heaven. At last, he burst
forth in the following Accents. “Sir, I
believe I know where to lay my little
Treasure up as well as another; I thank
G&wblank; if I am not so warm as some, I am
content; that is a Blessing greater than
Riches; and he to whom that is given
need ask no more. To be content with
a little is greater than to possess the
World, which a Man may possess without
being so. Lay up my Treasure! what
matters where a Man's Treasure is,
whose Heart is in the Scriptures? there is
the Treasure of a Christian.” At these 

Words the Water ran from Adams's Eyes; 
and catching Trulliber by the Hand, in a
Rapture, “Brother,” says he, “Heavens
bless the Accident by which I came to
see you; I would have walked many a
Mile to have communed with you, and,
believe me, I will shortly pay you a
second Visit: but my Friends, I fancy,
by this time, wonder at my stay, so let
me have the Money immediately.” Trulliber
then put on a stern Look, and cry'd
out, “Thou dost not intend to rob me?” 
At which the Wife, bursting into Tears,
fell on her Knees and roared out, “O
dear Sir, for Heaven's sake don't rob my
Master, we are but poor People.” “Get
up for a Fool as thou art, and go about
thy Business,” said Trulliber, “dost
think the Man will venture his Life? he
is a Beggar and no Robber.” “Very
true indeed,” answered Adams. “I
wish, with all my heart, the Tithing-Man
was here,” cries Trulliber, “I
would have thee punished as a Vagabond
for thy Impudence. Fourteen Shillings
indeed! I won't give thee a Farthing. 
I believe thou art no more a Clergyman
than the Woman there, (pointing to his
Wife) but if thou art, dost deserve to
have thy Gown stript over thy Shoulders,
for running about the Country in such a 

manner.” “I forgive your Suspicions,” 
says Adams, “but suppose I am not a
Clergyman, I am nevertheless thy Brother,
and thou, as a Christian, much
more as a Clergyman, art obliged to
relieve my Distress.” “Dost preach to
me,” replied Trulliber, “dost pretend
to instruct me in my Duty?” “Ifacks,
a good Story,” cries Mrs. Trulliber,
to preach to my Master.” “Silence,
Woman,” cries Trulliber; “I would
have thee know, Friend,” (addressing
himself to Adams,) “I shall not learn my
Duty from such as thee; I know what
Charity is, better than to give to Vagabonds. 
Besides, if we were inclined,
the Poors Rate obliges us to give so
much Charity,” (cries the Wife.) 
Pugh! thou art a Fool, Poors Reate! hold
thy Nonsense,” answered Trulliber, and
then turning to Adams, he told him, “he
would give him nothing.” “I am sorry,” 
answered Adams, “that you do know
what Charity is, since you practise it no
better; I must tell you, if you trust to
your Knowledge for your Justification,
you will find yourself deceived, tho' you
should add Faith to it without good
Works.” “Fellow,” cries Trulliber,
Dost thou speak against Faith in my
House? Get out of my Doors, I will no 

longer remain under the same Roof with
a Wretch who speaks wantonly of Faith
and the Scriptures.” “Name not the
Scriptures,” says Adams, “How, not
name the Scriptures! Do you disbelieve
the Scriptures?” cries Trulliber. 
No, but you do,” answered Adams, “if
I may reason from your Practice: for
their Commands are so explicite, and
their Rewards and Punishments so immense,
that it is impossible a Man should
stedfastly believe without obeying. Now,
there is no Command more express, no
Duty more frequently enjoined than Charity. 
Whoever therefore is void of Charity,
I make no scruple of pronouncing
that he is no Christian.” “I would not
advise thee,” (says Trulliber) “to say
that I am no Christian. I won't take it of
you: for I believe I am as good a Man as
thyself;” (and indeed, tho' he was now rather
too corpulent for athletic Exercises, he
had in his Youth been one of the best Boxers
and Cudgel-players in the County.) 
His Wife seeing him clench his Fist, interposed,
and begged him not to fight, but
shew himself the true Christian, and take
the Law of him. As nothing could provoke
Adams to strike, but an absolute Assault
on himself or his Friend; he smiled 

at the angry Look and Gestures of Trulliber; 
and telling him, he was sorry to see
such Men in Orders, departed without
farther Ceremony. 



An Adventure, the Consequence of a
new Instance which Parson Adams
gave of his Forgetfulness. 
When he came back to the Inn,
he found Joseph and Fanny sitting
together. They were so far from thinking
his Absence long, as he had feared they
would, that they never once miss'd or
thought of him. Indeed, I have been often
assured by both, that they spent these
Hours in a most delightful Conversation:
but as I never could prevail on either to relate
it, so I cannot communicate it to the
Reader. 
Adams acquainted the Lovers with the
ill Success of his Enterprize. They were
all greatly confounded, none being able
to propose any Method of departing, 'till
Joseph at last advised calling in the Hostess,
and desiring her to trust them; 
which Fanny said she despaired of her doing, 

as she was one of the sourest-fac'd
Women she had ever beheld. 
But she was agreebly disappointed; for
the Hostess was no sooner asked the Question
than she readily agreed; and with a
Curt'sy and Smile, wished them a good
Journey. However, lest Fanny's Skill
in Physiognomy should be called in question,
we will venture to assign one Reason,
which might probably incline her to this
Confidence and Good-Humour. When
Adams said he was going to visit his Brother,
he had unwittingly imposed on Joseph
and Fanny; who both believed he had
meant his natural Brother, and not his Brother
in Divinity; and had so informed the
Hostess on he Enquiry after him. Now
Mr. Trulliber had by his Piety, Gravity,
Austerity, Reserve, and the Opinion of
his great Wealth, so great an Authority in
his Parish, that they all lived in the utmost
Fear and Apprehension of him. It was
therefore no wonder that the Hostess, who
knew it was in his Option whether she
should ever sell another Mug of Drink,
did not dare affront his supposed Brother
by denying him Credit. 
They were now just on their Departure,
when Adams recollected he had left his 

Great Coat and Hat at Mr. Trulliber's As
he was not desirous of renewing his Visit,
the Hostess herself, having no Servant at
home, offered to fetch it. 
This was an unfortunate Expedient: for
the Hostess was soon undeceived in the
Opinion she had entertained of Adams,
whom Trulliber abused in the grossest
Terms, especially when he heard he had
had the Assurance to pretend to be his
near Relation. 
At her Return therefore, she entirely
changed her Note. She said, “Folks
might be ashamed of travelling about
and pretending to be what they were
not. That Taxes were high, and for
her part, she was obliged to pay for
what she had; she could not therefore
possibly, nor she would not trust any
body, no not her own Father. That
Money was never scarcer, and she wanted
to make up a Sum. That she expected
therefore they should pay their
Reckoning before they left the House.” 
Adams was now greatly perplexed:
but as he knew that he could easily have
borrowed such a Sum at his own Parish,
and as he knew he would have lent it 

himself to any Mortal in Distress; so he
took fresh Courage, and sallied out all
round the Parish, but to no purpose; he
returned as pennyless as he went, groaning
and lamenting, that it was possible
in a Country professing Christianity, for
a Wretch to starve in the midst of his
Fellow-Creatures who abounded. 
Whilst he was gone, the Hostess
who stayed as a sort of Guard with Joseph
and Fanny entertained them with the
Goodness of Parson Trulliber; and indeed
he had not only a very good Character, as
to other Qualities, in the Neighbourhood,
but was reputed a Man of great Charity. 
Adams was no sooner returned the second
time, than the Storm grew exceeding
high, the Hostess declaring among
other things, that if they offered to stir
without paying her, she would soon overtake
them with a Warrant. 
Plato or Aristotle, or some body else
hath said, That when the most exquisite
Cunning fails, Chance often
hits the Mark, and that by
Means the least expected. Virgil
expresses this very boldly: 


Turne quod optanti Divûm promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda Dies en attulit ultro.
I would quote more great Men if I could:
but my Memory not permitting me, I will
proceed to exemplify these Observations by
the following Instance. 
There chanced (for Adams had not
Cunning enough to contrive it) to be at
that time in the Alehouse, a Fellow, who
had been formerly a Drummer in an Irish
Regiment, and now travelled the Country
as a Pedlar. This Man having attentively
listened to the Discourse of the Hostess, at
last took Adams aside, and asked him what
the Sum was for which they were detained. 
As soon as he was informed, he sighed and
said, “he was sorry it was so much: for
that he had no more than six Shillings
and Sixpence in his Pocket, which he
would lend them with all his heart.” 
Adams gave a Caper, and cry'd out, “it
would do: for that he had Sixpence himself.” 
And thus these poor People,
who could not engage the Compassion of
Riches and Piety, were at length delivered
out of their Distress by the Charity of a poor
Pedlar. 

I Shall refer it to my Reader, to make
what Observations he pleases on this Incident:
it is sufficient for me to inform him,
that after Adams and his Companions had
returned him a thousand Thanks, and told
him where he might call to be repaid,
they all sallied out of the House without
any Complements from their Hostess, or
indeed without paying her any; Adams
declaring, he would take particular Care
never to call there again, and she on her
side assuring them she wanted no such
Guests. 



A very curious Adventure, in which
Mr. Adams gave a much greater Instance
of the honest Simplicity of his
Heart than of his Experience in the
Ways of this World. 
Our Travellers had walked about two
Miles from that Inn, which they
had more reason to have mistaken for a
Castle, than Don Quixote ever had any of
those in which he sojourned; seeing they
had met with such Difficulty in escaping 

out of its Walls; when they came to a Parish,
and beheld a Sign of Invitation hanging
out. A Gentleman sat smoaking a Pipe
at the Door; of whom Adams enquired the
Road, and received so courteous and obliging
an Answer, accompanied with so smiling
a Countenance, that the good Parson, whose
Heart was naturally disposed to Love and
Affection, began to ask several other Questions; 
particularly the Name of the Parish,
and who was the Owner of a large
House whose Front they then had in prospect. 
The Gentleman answered as obligingly
as before; and as to the House, acquainted
him it was his own. He then
proceeded in the following manner: “Sir,
I presume by your Habit you are a Clergyman:
and as you are travelling on
foot, I suppose a Glass of good Beer will
not be disagreeable to you; and I can recommend
my Landlord's within, as
some of the best in all this County. What
say you, will you halt a little and
let us take a Pipe together: there is no
better Tobacco in the Kingdom?” This
Proposal was not displeasing to Adams,
who had allayed his Thirst that Day, with
no better Liquor than what Mrs. Trulliber's
Cellar had produced; and which was indeed
little superior either in Richness or
Flavour to that which distilled from those 

Grains her generous Husband bestowed on
his Hogs. Having therefore abundantly
thanked the Gentleman for his kind Invitation,
and bid Joseph and Fanny follow
him, he entered the Ale-House, where
a large Loaf and Cheese and a Pitcher of
Beer, which truly answered the Character
given of it, being set before them, the
three Travellers fell to eating with Appetites
infinitely more voracious than are to be
found at the most exquisite Eating-Houses
in the Parish of St. James's. 
The Gentleman expressed great Delight
in the hearty and chearful Behaviour of
Adams; and particularly in the Familiarity
with which he conversed with Joseph and
Fanny, whom he often called his Children,
a Term, he explained to mean no more
than his Parishioners; saying, he looked
on all those whom God had entrusted to
his Cure, to stand to him in that Relation. 
The Gentleman shaking him by the Hand
highly applauded those Sentiments. “They
are indeed,” says he, “the true Principles
of a Christian Divine; and I heartily
wish they were universal: but on the
contrary, I am sorry to say the Parson of
our Parish instead of esteeming his poor
Parishioners as a part of his Family, seems
rather to consider them as not of the 

same Species with himself. He seldom
speaks to any unless some few the richest
of us; nay indeed, he will not move his
Hat to the others. I often laugh when
I behold him on Sundays strutting along
the Church-Yard, like a Turky-Cock,
through Rows of his Parishioners; who
bow to him with as much Submission and
are as unregarded as a Sett of servile
Courtiers by the proudest Prince in Christendom. 
But if such temporal Pride is
ridiculous, surely the spiritual is odious
and detestable: if such a puffed up
empty human Bladder strutting in princely
Robes, justly moves one's Derision; 
surely in the Habit of a Priest it must
raise our Scorn.” 
“Doubtless,” answered Adams, “your
Opinion is right; but I hope such Examples
are rare. The Clergy whom I
have the honour to know, maintain a
different Behaviour; and you will allow
me, Sir, that the Readiness, which too
many of the Laity show to condemn
the Order, may be one reason of their
avoiding too much Humility.” “Very
true indeed,” says the Gentleman; “I
find, Sir, you are a Man of excellent
Sense, and am happy in this Opportunity
of knowing you: perhaps, our accidental 

meeting may not be disadvantageous
to you neither. At present, I
shall only say to you, that the Incumbent
of this Living is old and infirm; 
and that it is in my Gift. Doctor, give
me your Hand; and assure yourself of
it at his Decease,” Adams told him,
he was never more confounded in his
Life, than at his utter Incapacity to
make any return to such noble and unmerited
Generosity.” “A mere Trifle,
Sir,” cries the Gentleman, “scarce
worth your Acceptance; a little more
than three hundred a Year. I wish it
was double the Value for your sake.” 
Adams bowed, and cried from the Emotions
of his Gratitude; when the other asked
him, “if he was married, or had any
Children, besides those in the spiritual
Sense he had mentioned.” “Sir,” 
replied the Parson, “I have a Wife
and six at your service.” “That is unlucky,” 
says the Gentleman; “for
I would otherwise have taken you
into my own House as my Chaplain:
however, I have another in the Parish,
(for the Parsonage House is not good
enough) which I will furnish for you. 
Pray does your Wife understand a Dairy?” 
I can't profess she does,” says Adams. 
I am sorry for it,” quoth the Gentleman; 

I would have given you half a dozen
Cows, and very good Grounds to have
maintained them.” “Sir,” says Adams,
in an Ecstacy, “you are too liberal; indeed
you are.” “Not at all,” cries
the Gentleman, “I esteem Riches only as
they give me an opportunity of doing
Good; and I never saw one whom I had
greater Inclination to serve.” At which
Words he shook him heartily by the Hand,
and told him he had sufficient Room in his
House to entertain him and his Friends. 
Adams begged he might give him no such
Trouble, that they could be very well accommodated
in the House where they were; 
forgetting they had not a Sixpenny Piece
among them. The Gentleman would not
be denied; and informing himself how far
they were travelling, he said it was too
long a Journey to take on foot, and begged
that they would favour him, by suffering
him to lend them a Servant and
Horses; adding withal, that if they would
do him the pleasure of their Company
only two days, he would furnish them
with his Coach and six. Adams turning
to Joseph, said, how lucky is this Gentleman's
goodness to you, who I am afraid
would be scarce able to hold out on your
lame Leg, and then addressing the Person
who made him these liberal Promises, 

after much bowing, he cried out,
“Blessed be the Hour which first introduced
me to a Man of your Charity:
you are indeed a Christian of the true primitive
kind, and an honour to the Country
wherein you live. I would willing have
taken a Pilgrimage to the holy Land to
to have beheld you: for the Advantages
which we draw from your Goodness,
give me little pleasure, in comparison of
what I enjoy for your own sake; when I
consider the Treasures you are by these
means laying up for your self in a Country
that passeth not away. We will therefore,
most generous Sir, accept your Goodness,
as well the Entertainment you have so
kindly offered us at your House this
Evening, as the Accommodation of your
Horses To-morrow Morning.” He then
began to search for his Hat, as did Joseph
for his; and both they and Fanny were in
order of Departure, when the Gentleman
stopping short, and seeming to meditate
by himself for the space of about a Minute,
exclaimed thus: “Sure never any thing was
so unlucky; I have forgot that my
House-Keeper was gone abroad, and has
locked up all my Rooms; indeed I
would break them open for you, but
shall not be able to furnish you with a
Bed; for she has likewise put away all
my Linnen. I am glad it entered 

into my Head before I had given you
the Trouble of walking there; besides, I
believe you will find better accommodations
here than you expect. Landlord,
you can provide good Beds for these
People, can't you?” “Yes and please
your Worship,” cries the Host, “and
such as no Lord or Justice of the Peace in
the Kingdom need be ashamed to lie in.” 
“I am heartily sorry,” says the Gentleman,
“for this Disappointment. I am resolved
I will never suffer her to carry away
the Keys again.” “Pray, Sir, let it not
make you uneasy,” cries Adams, “we
shall do very well here; and the Loan of
your Horses is a Favour, we shall be incapable
of making any Return to.” “Ay!” 
said the Squire “the Horses shall attend you
here at what Hour in the Morning you
please.” And now after many Civilities too
tedious to enumerate, many Squeezes by the
Hand, with most affectionate Looks and
Smiles on each other, and after appointing
the Horses at seven the next Morning, the
Gentleman took his Leave of them, and
departed to his own House. Adams and
his Companions returned to the Table,
where the Parson smoaked another Pipe,
and then they all retired to Rest. 
Mr. Adams rose very early and called
Joseph out of his Bed, between whom 

a very fierce Dispute ensued, whether Fanny
should ride behind Joseph, or behind the
Gentleman's Servant; Joseph insisting on
it, that he was perfectly recovered, and
was as capable of taking care of Fanny,
as any other Person could be. But Adams
would not agree to it, and declared he
would not trust her behind him; for that
he was weaker than he imagined himself
to be. 
This Dispute continued a long time,
and had begun to be very hot, when a
Servant arrived from their good Friend, to
acquaint them, that he was unfortunately
prevented from lending them any Horses; 
for that his Groom had, unknown to him,
put his whole Stable under a Course of
Physick. 
This Advice presently struck the two
Disputants dumb; Adams cried out, “Was
ever any thing so unlucky as this poor
Gentleman? I protest I am more sorry
on his account, than my own. You see,
Joseph, how this good-natur'd Man is
treated by his Servants; one locks up
his Linen, another physicks his Horses; 
and I suppose by his being at this House
last Night, the Butler had locked up his
Cellar. Bless us! how Good-nature is 

used in this World! I protest I am more
concerned on his account than my own.” 
“So am not I,” cries Joseph; “not that I
am much troubled about walking on foot; 
all my Concern is, how we shall get out
of the House; unless God sends another
Pedlar to redeem us. But certainly, this
Gentleman has such an Affection for you,
that he would lend you a larger Sum
than we owe here; which is not above
four or five Shillings.” “Very true,
Child,” answered Adams; “I will
write a Letter to him, and will even
venture to sollicit him for three Half-Crowns; 
there will be no harm in having
two or three Shillings in our Pockets:
as we have full forty Miles to travel, we
may possibly have occasion for them.” 
Fanny being now risen, Joseph paid
her a Visit, and left Adams to write his
Letter; which having finished, he dispatched
a Boy with it to the Gentleman,
and then seated himself by the Door,
lighted his Pipe, and betook himself to
Meditation. 
The Boy staying longer than seemed to
be necessary, Joseph who with Fanny
was now returned to the Parson, expressed
some Apprehensions, that the Gentleman's 

Steward had locked up his Purse
too. To which Adams answered, “It
might very possibly be; and he should
wonder at no Liberties which the Devil
might put into the Head of a wicked
Servant to take with so worthy a Master:” 
but added, “that as the Sum
was so small, so noble a Gentleman would
be easily able to procure it in the Parish; 
tho' he had it not in his own Pocket. 
Indeed,” says he, “if it was four or
five Guineas, or any such large Quantity
of Money, it might be a different
matter.” 
They were now sat down to Breakfast
over some Toast and Ale, when the Boy
returned; and informed them, that the
Gentleman was not at home. “Very well,” 
cries Adams; “but why, Child, did you
not stay 'till his return? Go back again,
my good Boy, and wait for his coming
home: he cannot be gone far, as his
Horses are all sick; and besides, he had
no Intention to go abroad; for he invited
us to spend this Day and To-morrow
at his House. Therefore, go back,
Child, and tarry 'till his return home.” 
The Messenger departed, and was back again
with great Expedition; bringing an
Account, that the Gentleman was gone a 

long Journey, and would not be at home
again this Month. At these Words, Adams
seemed greatly confounded, saying, “This
must be a sudden Accident, as the
Sickness or Death of a Relation, or
some such unforeseen Misfortune;” and
then turning to Joseph, cried, “I wish you
had reminded me to have borrowed this
Money last Night.” Joseph smiling, answered,
“he was very much deceived, if
the Gentleman would not have found
some Excuse to avoid lending it. I
own,” says he, “I was never much
pleased with his professing so much Kindness
for you at first sight: for I have
heard the Gentlemen of our Cloth in
London tell many such Stories of their
Masters. But when the Boy brought the
Message back of his not being at home,
I presently knew what would follow; for
whenever a Man of Fashion doth not
care to fulfil his Promises, the Custom
is, to order his Servants that he will never
be at home to the Person so promised. 
In London they call it denying
him. I have my self denied Sir Thomas
Booby above a hundred times; and when
the Man has danced Attendance for about
a Month, or sometimes longer, he
is acquainted in the end, that the Gentleman
is gone out of Town, and could 

do nothing in the Business.” “Good
Lord!” says Adams; “What Wickedness
is there in the Christian World? I
profess, almost equal to what I have
read of the Heathens. But surely, Joseph,
your Suspicions of this Gentleman
must be unjust; for, what a silly Fellow
must he be, who would do the Devil's
Work for nothing? and can'st thou tell
me any Interest he could possibly propose
to himself by deceiving us in his Professions?” 
“It is not for me,” answered
Joseph, “to give Reasons for what Men
do, to a Gentleman of your Learning.” 
“You say right,” quoth Adams; “Knowledge
of Men is only to be learnt from
Books, Plato and Seneca for that; and
those are Authors, I am afraid Child,
you never read.” “Not I, Sir, truly,” 
answered Joseph; “all I know is, it is a
Maxim among the Gentlemen of our
Cloth, that those Masters who promise
the most perform the least; and I have
often heard them say, they have found
the largest Vailes in those Families,
where they were not promised any. But,
Sir, instead of considering any farther
these Matters, it would be our wisest
way to contrive some Method of getting
out of this House: for the generous
Gentleman, instead of doing us any Service, 

hath left us the whole Reckoning
to pay.” Adams was going to answer,
when their Host came in; and with a kind
of Jeering-Smile said, “Well, Masters! 
the Squire has not sent his Horses for you
yet. Laud help me! how easily some
Folks make Promises!” “How!” says
Adams, “have you ever known him do
any thing of this kind before?” “Aye
marry have I,” answered the Host; “it
is no business of mine, you know, Sir,
to say any thing to a Gentleman to his
face: but now he is not here, I will
assure you, he has not his Fellow within
the three next Market-Towns. I own, I
could not help laughing, when I heard
him offer you the Living; for thereby
hangs a good Jest. I thought he would
have offered you my House next; for
one is no more his to dispose of than the
other.” At these Words, Adams blessing
himself, declared, “he had never read of
such a Monster; but what vexes me
most,” says he, “is, that he hath decoyed
us into running up a long Debt with you,
which we are not able to pay; for we
have no Money about us; and what is
worse, live at such a distance, that, if
you should trust us, I am afraid you
would lose your Money, for want of our
finding any Conveniency of sending it.” 

“Trust you, Master!” says the Host,
that I will with all my heart; I honour
the Clergy too much to deny trusting
one of them for such a Trifle; besides,
I like your fear of never paying me. I
have lost many a Debt in my Life-time; 
but was promised to be paid them all
in a very short time. I will score this
Reckoning for the Novelty of it. It is
the first I do assure you of its kind. 
But what say you, Master, shall we
have t'other Pot before we part? It
will waste but a little Chalk more; and
if you never pay me a Shilling, the Loss
will not ruin me.” Adams liked the Invitation
very well; especially as it was delivered
with so hearty an Accent. —He
shook his Host by the Hand, and thanking
him, said, “he would tarry another
Pot, rather for the Pleasure of such
worthy Company than for the Liquor;” 
adding, “he was glad to find some Christians
left in the Kingdom; for that he
almost began to suspect that he was sojourning
in a Country inhabited only by
Jews and Turks.” 
The kind Host produced the Liquor,
and Joseph with Fanny retired into the
Garden; where while they solaced themselves
with amorous Discourse, Adams sat 

down with his Host; and both filling their
Glasses and lighting their Pipes, they began
that Dialogue, which the Reader will
find in the next Chapter. 



A Dialogue between Mr. Abraham
Adams and his Host, which, by
the Disagreement in their Opinions
seemed to threaten an unlucky Catastrope,
had it not been timely prevented
by the Return of the Lovers. 
Sir,” said the Host, “I assure you,
you are not the first to whom our
Squire hath promised more than he hath
performed. He is so famous for this
Practice, that his Word will not be taken
for much by those who know him. 
I remember a young Fellow whom he
promised his Parents to make an Exciseman. 
The poor People, who could ill
afford it, bred their Son to Writing and
Accounts, and other Learning, to qualify
him for the Place; and the Boy held
up his Head above his Condition with
these Hopes; nor would he go to plough,
nor do any other kind of Work; and
went constantly drest as fine as could be, 

with two clean Holland Shirts a Week,
and this for several Years; 'till at last
he followed the Squire up to London,
thinking there to mind him of his Promises:
but he could never get sight of
him. So that being out of Money and
Business, he fell into evil Company, and
wicked Courses; and in the end came to
a Sentence of Transportation, the News
of which broke the Mother's Heart. 
There was a Neighbour of mine, a Farmer,
who had two Sons whom he bred
up to the Business. Pretty Lads they
were; nothing would serve the Squire,
but that the youngest must be made a
Parson. Upon which, he persuaded
the Father to send him to School, promising,
that he would afterwards maintain
him at the University; and when
he was of proper Age, give him a Living. 
But after the Lad had been seven
Years at School, and his Father brought
him to the Squire with a Letter from his
Master, that he was fit for the University; 
the Squire, instead of minding his
Promise, or sending him thither at his
Expence, only told his Father, that the
young Man was a fine Scholar; and it
was pity he could not afford to keep him
at Oxford for four or five Years more,
by which Time, if he could get him a 

Curacy, he might have him ordained.” 
The Farmer said, “he was not a Man
sufficient to do any such thing.” “Why
then,” answered the Squire; “I am
very sorry you have given him so much
Learning; for if he cannot get his living
by that, it will rather spoil him for
any thing else; and your other Son
who can hardly write his Name, will
do more at plowing and sowing, and is
in a better Condition than he: and indeed
so it proved; for the poor Lad not
finding Friends to maintain him in his
Learning, as he had expected; and being
unwilling to work, fell to drinking,
though he was a very sober Lad before; 
and in a short time, partly with Grief,
and partly with good Liquor, fell into
a Consumption and died. There was
another, a young Woman, and the
handsomest in all this Neighbourhood,
whom he enticed up to London, promising
to make her a Gentlewoman to one
of your Women of Quality: but instead
of keeping his Word, we have since
heard, after having a Child by her himself,
she became a common Whore; then
kept a Coffee-House in Covent-Garden,
and a little after died of the French
Distemper in a Goal. I could tell you
many more Stories: but how do you 

imagine he served me myself? You must
know, Sir, I was bred a Sea-faring Man; 
and have been many Voyages; 'till at
last I came to be Master of a Ship myself,
and was in a fair Way of making a
Fortune, when I was attacked by one
of those cursed Guarda-Costas, who took
our Ships before the Beginning of the
War; and after a Fight wherein I
lost the greater part of my Crew, my
Rigging all demolished, and two Shots
received between Wind and Water, I
was forced to strike. The Villains carried
off my Ship, a Brigantine of 150
Tons; and put me, a Man, and a Boy,
into a little bad Pink, in which with much
ado, we at last made Falmouth; tho' I
believe the Spaniards did not imagine
she could possibly live a Day at Sea. 
Upon my return hither, where my
Wife who was of this Country then lived,
the Squire told me, he was so pleased
with the Defence I had made against the
Enemy, that he did not fear getting me
promoted to a Lieutenancy of a Man
of War, if I would accept of it, which
I thankfully assured him I would. Well,
Sir, two or three Years past, during
which, I had many repeated Promises,
not only from the Squire, but (as he told
me) from the Lords of the Admiralty. 

He never returned from London, but I
was assured I might be satisfied now,
for I was certain of the first Vacancy; 
and what surprizes me still, when I reflect
on it, these Assurances were given
me with no less Confidence, after so many
Disappointments, than at first. At last,
Sir, growing going weary and somewhat suspicious
after so much delay. I wrote to
a Friend in London, who I knew had
some Acquaintance at the best House in
the Admiralty; and desired him to back
the Squire's Interest: for indeed, I feared
he had sollicited the Affair with more
Coldness than he pretended. —And what
Answer do you think my Friend sent me? 
—Truly, Sir, he acquainted me, that
the Squire had never mentioned my
Name at the Admiralty in his Life; and
unless I had much faithfuller Interest,
advised me to give over my Pretensions,
which I immediately did; and with the
Concurrence of my Wife, resolved to
set up an Alehouse, where you are heartily
welcome: and so my Service to you; 
and may the Squire, and all such sneaking
Rascals go to the Devil together.” 
“Oh fie!” says Adams; “Oh fie! He is
indeed a wicked Man; but G&wblank; will, I
hope, turn his Heart to Repentance. 
Nay, if he could but once see the Meanness 

of this detestable Vice; would he
but once reflect that he is one of the
most scandalous as well as pernicious Lyars; 
sure he must despise himself to so
intolerable a degree, that it would be impossible
for him to continue a Moment
in such a Course. And to confess the
Truth, notwithstanding the Baseness of
this Character, which he hath too well deserved,
he hath in his Countenance sufficient
Symptoms of that bona Indoles,
that Sweetness of Disposition which furnishes
out a good Christian.” “Ah!
Master, Master,” (says the Host,) “if
you had travelled as far as I have, and
conversed with the many Nations where
I have traded, you would not give any
Credit to a Man's Countenance. Symptoms
in his Countenance,” quotha! “I
would look there perhaps to see whether
a Man had had the Small-Pox, but for nothing
else!” He spoke this with so little
regard to the Parson's Observation, that it
a good deal nettled him; and taking the
Pipe hastily from his Mouth, he thus answered: 
—“Master of mine, perhaps I
have travelled a great deal farther than
you without the Assistance of a Ship. Do
you imagine sailing by different Cities or
Countries is travelling? No. 


Cœlum non Animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
“I Can go farther in an Afternoon, than
you in a Twelve-Month. What, I
suppose you have seen the Pillars of
Hercules, and perhaps the Walls of Carthage. 
Nay, you may have heard Scylla,
and seen Charybdis; you may have entered
the Closet where Archimedes was
found at the taking Syracuse. I suppose
you have sailed among the Cyclades, and
passed the famous Streights which take
their name from the unfortunate Helle,
whose Fate is sweetly described by Apollonius
Rhodius; you have past the very
Spot, I conceive, where Dædalus fell into
that Sea, his waxen Wings being melted
by the Sun; you have traversed the
Euxine Sea, I make no doubt; nay, you
may have been on the Banks of the Caspian,
and called at Colchis, to see if there
is ever another Golden Fleece.” —“Not
I truly, Master,” answered the Host, “I
never touched at any of these Places.” 
“But I have been at all these,” replied
Adams. “Then I suppose,” cries the
Host, “you have been at the East Indies,
for there are no such, I will be sworn 

either in the West or the Levant.” “Pray
where's the Levant,” quoth Adams,
that should be in the East Indies by
right.” —“O ho! you are a pretty
Traveller,” cries the Host, “and not
know the Levant. My service to you,
Master; you must not talk of these things
with me! you must not tip us the Traveller; 
it won't go here.” “Since thou
art so dull to misunderstand me still,” 
quoth Adams, “I will inform thee; the
travelling I mean is in Books, the only
way of travelling by which any Knowledge
is to be acquired. From them I
learn what I asserted just now, that Nature
generally imprints such a Portraiture
of the Mind in the Countenance, that a
skilful Physiognomist will rarely be deceived. 
I presume you have never read
the Story of Socrates to this purpose, and
therefore I will tell it you. A certain
Physiognomist asserted of Socrates, that
he plainly discovered by his Features that
he was a Rogue in his Nature. A Character
so contrary to the Tenour of all
this great Man's Actions, and the generally
received Opinion concerning him,
that the Boys of Athens threw Stones at
the Physiognomist, and would have demolished
him for his Ignorance, had not
Socrates himself prevented them by confessing 

the Truth of his Observations, and
acknowledging that tho' he corrected his
Disposition by Philosophy, he was indeed
naturally as inclined to Vice as
had been predicated of him. Now,
pray resolve me,—How should a Man
know this Story, if he had not read it?” 
“Well Master,” said the Host, “and
what signifies it whether a Man knows
it or no? He who goes abroad as I have
done, will always have opportunities
enough of knowing the World, without
troubling his head with Socrates,
or any such Fellows.” —“Friend,” 
cres Adams, “if a Man would sail
round the World, and anchor in every
Harbour of it, without Learning, he
would return home as ignorant as he
went out.” “Lord help you,” answered
the Host, “there was my Boatswain, poor
Fellow! he could scarce either write or
read; and yet he would navigate a Ship
with any Master of a Man of War; and
a very pretty knowledge of Trade he had
too.” “Trade,” answered Adams, “as
Aristotle proves in his first Chapter of
Politics, is below a Philosopher, and unnatural
as it is managed now. The Host
look'd stedfastly at Adams, and after a
Minute's silence asked him “if he was one
of the Writers of the Gazetteers? for I 

have heard,” says he, “they are writ by
Parsons.” “Gazetteers!” answer'd Adams. 
“What is that?” “It is a dirty News-Paper,” 
replied the Host, “which
hath been given away all over the Nation
for these many Years to abuse Trade
and honest Men, which I would not
suffer to lie on my Table, tho' it hath
been offered me for nothing.” “Not I
truly,” said Adams, I never write any
thing but Sermons, and I assure you I
am no Enemy to Trade, whilst it is
consistent with Honesty; nay, I have always
looked on the Tradesman, as a
very valuable Member of Society, and
perhaps inferior to none but the Man of
Learning.” “No, I believe he is not,
nor to him neither,” answered the Host. 
Of what use would Learning be in a
Country without Trade? What would all
you Parsons do to clothe your Backs and
feed your Bellies? Who fetches you your
Silks and your Linens, and your Wines, and
all the other Necessaries of Life? I speak
chiefly with regard to the Sailors.” “You
should say the Extravagancies of Life,” 
replied the Parson, “but admit they were
the Necessaries, there is something more
necessary than Life it self which is provided
by Learning; I mean the Learning
of the Clergy. Who clothes you with 

Piety, Meekness, Humility, Charity, Patience,
and all the other Christian Virtues? 
Who feeds your Souls with the Milk of
brotherly Love, and diets them with all the
dainty Food of Holiness, which at once
cleanses them of all impure carnal Affections,
and fattens them with the truly
rich Spirit of Grace? —Who doth this?” 
“Ay, who indeed!” cries the Host; “for
I do not remember ever to have seen any
such Clothing or such Feeding. And so
in the mean time, Master, my service to
you.” Adams was going to answer with
some severity, when Joseph and Fanny re-returned,
and pressed his Departure so
eagerly, that he would not refuse them; 
and so grasping his Crabstick, he took
leave of his Host, (neither of them being
so well pleased with each other as they had
been at their first sitting down together)
and with Joseph and Fanny, who both exprest
much Impatience, departed; and
now all together renewed their Journey. 