
Contains, among other particulars of less moment, an incident, which, to every reader of a distinguishing capacity, must certainly appear as extraordinary as it did to our fair heroine herself, or indeed any other in the whole history. 
An excess of satisfaction is sometimes as great an enemy to repose as an excess of grief; so little is human nature able to sustain the violence of any passion:—tho' Jenny went not into bed till almost the time in which she usually arose, yet could she not submit that those pleasing ideas she was now possessed of should be lost in sleep and an inactivity of thought. 
Never, indeed, had she experienced a contentment more sincere,—a joy more perfect than that she now felt;—scarce could lord Huntley himself long with greater impatience for the day which was to put him in possession of his wishes, than she did for the arrival of it as it was the day in which she was to set out on so agreeable a journey, the end of 
which promised her such an infinity of pleasure in surprising her dear Jemmy with her unexpected presence. 
It is certain that so agreeable a tour, taken in the company of persons of such high rank and fortune, and who, she was convinced, had a perfect friendship for her;—the going to a place so famous for its variety of amusements, had something in it extremely ravishing to a young heart, had love been entirely out of the question;—yet, it is no less certain, that this last was the prevailing motive;—the verb by which all desires of her soul was governed, and the rest no more than mere adjectives:—that was the grand structure her expectation formed, the others no more than exterior embellishments. 
Tasso, the Italian poet, seems to have, in my opinion, a very just notion of this passion, when he makes Armida, in his celebrated piece of Godsridus, say, 
Love, the great aim of all created beings!
The source and center of our hopes and fears!
From that they flow,—in that they terminate.
I know not whether, in my translation of this passage, I have done the original all the justice it deserves; but how much soever I may have wronged that great author in the expression, am pretty certain that I cannot be mistaken in his meaning. 
I believe, however, that very few of my readers, especially those of the softer sex, will stand in need of any comment on the present disposition of Jenny's heart,—their own will sufficiently inform them what her's must feel in the pleasing idea of rushing unexpectedly,—undreamt of,—unthought of, upon a lover so deservingly beloved,—who she knew languished to behold her, and whom she languished to behold. 
But notwithstanding all the pretty images she pictured in her mind, on account of this meeting, she suffered not herself to be so much engrossed by them as to neglect the settling her affairs in a proper manner before she went away:—she sent for mr. Morgan and mr. Ellwood, told them she was going out of town for some time, but without acquainting either of them to what place, and desired that they would give, during her absence, such directions to Jemmy's 
steward and housekeeper as should be found necessary. 
She had also some business to dispatch before her departure, in relation to remittances and accounts, with those gentlemen, who were her own trustees, and this, with some articles, concerning what habits and ornaments she should carry with her, was, as any one may suppose, sufficient employment for the short space of time between her agreeing to go on this journey and her taking it. 
There were very few of her acquaintance of whom she took any leave, and none to whom she imparted the rout she was about to pursue,—telling them only that she had engaged herself to take a little ramble into the country with lady Speck and miss Wingman; though the sole motive she had for preserving such secrecy in this point, was to avoid the railleries she must have expected to be treated with, in case they had known she was going to the place which Jemmy had made choice of for his refuge. 
She was returned to her apartment, after having paid the above-mentioned compliment to those, who, by their age or condition, most exacted it from her;— 
every necessary preparation for her journey was already made, and it was the eve of that important day in which she was to set out, and she had nothing now to do but to indulge contemplations on the happy consequence. 
The humour she was in, at present, was so serene and sweet, that one would have thought there was scarce a possibility for any thing to have discomposed her;—yet did the compass of a very few minutes serve to dissipate all the sunny chearfulness of her mind, and convert the late calm into a sudden tempest of disdain and indignation. 
Her footman came hastily into the room, and told her, that a gentleman in a chair begg'd leave to speak with her, if at home and alone,—‘Who is he, cry'd she;’ ‘He did not send up his name, reply'd the fellow; but by the glimpse I had of him between the curtains I think it is mr.—— 
Before he could pronounce the name, Belpine rush'd in;—he had justly doubted of admittance, and resolute to see her, had got out of his chair and follow'd the servant directly up stairs. 
—Jenny was astonished, and started at the sight of him; 
but he prevented her from speaking by a profound reverence, accompany'd by these words: ‘I fear'd, madam, said he, the disadvantageous opinion you have been inspir'd with of my principles and behaviour, might have excited you to deny me the privilege of saying something to you of much more consequence than the life which has been so cruelly attack'd, and so miraculously preserved, and which not to have utter'd I should have died a double death.’ 
‘If you have been attack'd,’ reply'd she, looking on him with the extremest scorn, ‘you justly merited it;—and if preserv'd, must be as vain as you are base, to imagine it any mark of heaven's favour to yourself:—but to what pretence, demanded she, to what new artifice, to disturb my quiet, am I indebted for this unexpected, this unwelcome visit?’ 
‘Ah, madam,’ cry'd he, casting his eyes round the room to see if the servant was withdrawn, and finding he was so, ‘great as my offences are, went he on, they rise not to that enormous height as a wish to persevere in them:—I rather come,’ continued he, putting one knee to the ground, ‘like a repentant 
sinner, to throw myself at the throne of mercy, and, in this humble posture, confess my crimes, and implore for giveness.’ 
‘There is no need of confession where the facts are fully proved, said she with the same contempt as before; you have already received the punishment of them from a hand best able to inflict it, and have nothing to fear from my resentment.’ 
‘Yet, madam, resumed he, I have much to hope from your forgiveness;—it is that indeed on which my soul's eternal peace depends;—it is not that I dread a second blow from mr. Jessamy, should he be inclin'd to repeat it, even were I certain his better fortune would again give him the advantage over me, and his revengeful sword bathe itself in my heart's best blood;—nor is the remembrance of my wounds, nor all the painful circumstances of my tedious cure, that is capable of giving me the least alarm;—but it is the sad remorse that I have been guilty of any thing to forfeit that portion of esteem I once was favour'd with by you, which, like a vulture, preys upon my vitals, and fills me with ideas too terrible for nature to sustain; 
—oh, therefore, have compassion,—vouchsafe to say you hate me not;—that you pardon all I have done, and while I live, I will live only in the study how to deserve such goodness.’ 
His words,—the seeming contrition in which he utter'd them,—his pathetic gestures,—his pale and dejected countenance,—altogether gave him such a pity-moving air as made Jenny lose much of the fierceness she had assum'd: —‘Mr. Jessamy, said she, is the person whose friendship you have so grosly abused; whom chiefly you have wrong'd; and if he can be brought to forgive the mischief you intended for us both, I shall easily remit that part of it which concerns myself;—therefore pray rise,—I am neither accustomed to receive, nor desire any such submissions.’ 
‘No, madam, reply'd this artful dissembler, I must not quit this humble posture till I have disclosed the whole of my transgression;—it is not enough that you pardon the faults I have been guilty of, without you vouchsafe also the same grace to the motive which induced me to commit them.’ 
‘Motive, cried she hastily, what motive but the most fiendlike disposition could tempt any man to behave as you have done?’ —Yes, madam, rejoined he, there is one, which if I were as certain you would absolve as I am that the whole world besides would applaud me for, I should be the most bless'd among my sex:—it was love, madam,—love of the most angelic being that Heaven ever form'd that has render'd me the criminal I seem.’ 
Finding she made no answer, as indeed it was impossible she should in the present confusion of her thoughts on so amasing a declaration,—‘Yes,—charming miss Jessamy, went he still on, if I have been base,—ungrateful,—false to the rules of honour and of friendship, it was your lovely self that made me so.’ —At these words she cried out,—‘Me, villain,—me!’—she as yet was able to bring forth no more, and he had the opportunity of replying. 
‘Blame not, said he, the effects of your own beauty, but rather pity a passion which made me deaf to every other consideration:—the more I have forgot the principles to which 
my youth were bred;—the more I have erred, the more I have proved the unbounded violence of my love; and even those very trangressions have some claim to a grateful recompence from you.’ 
‘Monstrous unheard of impudence, returned she, a little recovered from her surprize, had you the vanity and folly to imagine, that if your wicked arts had succeeded to separate me from mr. Jessamy, I should ever have descended to cast my eyes on you?’ 
‘I am a gentleman, madam,’ answer'd he, rising from the posture he had all this time been in, ‘of as good a family as mr. Jessamy, and heir to an estate not inferior to his:—I knew, indeed, you were designed for him in your childhood, but was ignorant that your partial fancy preferred him to all other men; and therefore hoped’—‘I will hear no more, interrupted she, nor suffer in my sight a wretch, whose unexampled baseness renders him even below my anger.’ 
In speaking this she rang her bell, and the footman immediately coming up 
—‘Shew this gentleman down, said she, 
and take care he enters here no more.’ —On this, Belpine's late paleness turned to a fiery red: —‘You might have saved yourself this charge, madam, cry'd he, I shall not trouble you with a second visit;’—and then flung out of the room without the least mark either of that love, or that humility, which he had, but a few moments before, taken so much pains to counterfeit. 
It may, perhaps, seem strange to some people, that a man of so much subtilty as Belpine, should venture to take a step which could reasonably promise nothing less than the mortification he received; but a very small share of observation is sufficient to inform us, that those who are most cunning in deceiving others, are frequently deceived themselves by their own vanity;—as was the case with him. 
The civilities which, on Jemmy's recommendation, he had been treated with by this lady, had made him imagine, on his first acquaintance with her, that she considered him with an extraordinary regard, and that it would not be very difficult to improve that regard into a softer passion, if a favourable opportunity should once offer for his attempting it. 
The precariousness of his circumstances, as has already been observed,—the largeness of her fortune,—and, it is probable, some share of inclination to her person, made him presently envy the friend who introduced him; and to endeavour, by all possible methods, how ungenerous and wicked soever, to exclude him from a happiness he wished to be in possession of himself. —The reader has seen how all the plots for this purpose were defeated, and how at last he began to despair of ever being able to succeed. 
On his recovering, however, his former views began to retake possession of his mind;—he thought things could not be worse with him than they were, and that it would be worth his while to try at least if by one bold push he could not retrieve all. 
The report he had caused to be spread concerning the imminent danger he was in from his wound, he found had made Jemmy keep abroad, which was the sole end he proposed by it;—being also told that Jenny appear'd with the same gaiety as ever, he had flatter'd himself with the hopes that absence and this accident had somewhat wean'd her affection from its 
former object, and that she had vanity enough to make her pleased with what he had done, when he should tell her it was occasioned only by the violence of a passion she had inspired him with. 
But the contempt with which our heroine treated this declaration, notwithstanding his disappointment and the vexation he conceived at it, forced him to confess that there are women who set no value on such effects of their beauty as they find not accompanied with honour and virtue. 
