

Gives a full explanation of some passages,
which hitherto have seemed
very dark and mysterious. 
This was a night of great confusion
in mr. Goodman's family:—lady
Mellasin either was, or pretended to be,
in fits;—miss Flora was called up soon
after she went to bed, but mr. Goodman
himself would not be prevailed upon to
rise, though told the condition his wife
was in, and that she begged with the utmost
earnestness to see him. 
This behaviour in a husband lately so
tender and affectionate, is a proof, not only
that the greatest love once turned degenerates into its reverse, but also that the
sweetest temper, when too much provoked
by injuries, is not always the most easy
to be reconciled. —The perfect trust he
had put in lady Mellasin,—the implicit
faith he had given to all she said,—and 
the dependance he had on the love she
had professed for him, made the deception
she was now convicted of appear in
worse colours, than otherwise it would
have done. 
The more he reflected on this ugly affair,
the more he was convinced of the
hypocrisy of his wife, in whom he had
placed such confidence. —“We have
been married near five years,” said he,
to himself; “how comes it to pass, that
the penalty of this bond was not in so
long a time demanded? —It must be
that she has kept it off by large interest,
and forbearance-money, and who knows
how far my credit may be endangered
for the raising of it? —'Tis likely,
that while I thought every thing necessary
for my family was purchased
with ready money, I may stand indebted
to all the tradesmen this wicked
woman has had any dealings with; 
—nay, I cannot even assure myself,
that other obligations of the same kind
with this I have already suffered for,
may not some time or other call upon
me for their discharge.” 
With these disturbed meditations, instead
of sleep, did he pass what was remaining
of the night, when he went to 
bed; yet he arose the next day full as early
as he was accustomed to do, after having
enjoyed the best repose. 
The first thing he did was to send for
as many of those trades-people, as he
either knew himself, or his servants could
inform him, had at any time sent goods
into his house. —On their presenting
themselves before him, he found, more
to his vexation than surprise, for he now
expected the worst, that all of them, even
to those who supplied his kitchen, had
bills of a long standing:—he discharged
all their several demands directly, and
having taken a receipt in full from each
of them, desired they would henceforward
suffer no goods to be left within his doors
without the value being paid on the delivery. 
Mr. Goodman had just dispatched the
last of these people, when he was told a
woman begged leave to speak to him: — 
“Another creditor, I suppose,” said he,
and then ordered she should come in. — 
As soon as she did so,—“Well, mistress,” 
cried he, seeing her a woman of
a very plain appearance,—“what is it
you require of me?” —“Nothing,
sir,” replied she, “but that you will
permit me to acquaint you with a 
thing, which it very much concerns
you to be informed of?” —“I should
otherwise be an enemy to myself,” resumed
he, “therefore pray speak what
you have to say?” 
‘I am, sir,’ said she, ‘the unfortunate
wife of one of the most wicked
men upon earth, and by my being so
have been compelled to be in some
measure accessary to the injustice you
have sustained; but I hope what I have
to reveal will atone for my transgression.’ 
—Mr Goodman then desired she
would sit down, and without any farther
prelude proceed to the business she came
upon. 
‘The sum of what I have to relate,’ 
rejoined she, ‘is, that the bond, on
which you were yesterday arrested, and
for the payment of which you have given
security, is no more than an impudent
fraud; but the particulars, that
prove it such, cannot but be very displeasing
to you; however I shall make
no apology for relating them, as the
perfect knowledge of the whole transaction
may put you in a way to prevent
all future injuries of the like nature. 
‘My husband, whose name is Oliver
Marplus,’ continued she, ‘had the honour
of waiting on a nobleman belonging
to court, when sir Simon Mellasin
had a post there:—his lady, now unhappily
yours, took a fancy to him,
and entered into a criminal conversation
with him, some time before her husband's
death, and has ever since, unless
very lately broke off, continued it. On
my first discovering it, he begged me
to be easy, and reminded me, that as
he had nothing at present to depend
upon, having lost his place, but her
ladyship's bounty, I ought to wink at
it, and be content that she should share
his person, since I shared in the benefits
arising from their intercourse. —I
knowing his temper too well, not to
know that any opposition I could make
would be in vain, and seeing no other
remedy, was obliged to feign a consent
to what the love I then had for him
rendered most terrible to me. —Thus
we went on, her ladyship still supplying
him with money for our support,
till he being informed, that her marriage
with you was near being consummated,
he bethought himself of a stratagem
to prevent the change of her 
condition from depriving him of the
continuance of her favour. —It was
this: 
‘Their private meetings were always
in the Savoy, at a house of my husband's
chusing for that purpose, the
master of it being his intimate friend
and companion. —Myself, and two
men, whom he made privy to the plot,
and were to personate officers of justice,
were to be concealed in the next room
to the lovers, and as soon as we found
they were in bed, burst open the door,
rush in, and catch them in the very
act of shame. 
‘All this was executed according as it
was contrived;—my husband jumped
out of bed, pretended to struggle with
the sham constables, and swore he would
murder me. —I acted my part, as they
since told me, to the life,—seemed a
very fury, and said I did not care what
became of me, if I was but revenged
upon my rival. —Lady Mellasin tore
her hair, wept, and intreated me in the
most abject terms to forgive, and not
expose a woman of her rank to public
scorn and infamy. —To which I replied,
that it was not her quality should
protect her;—I loaded her with the 
most inveterate reproaches I could think
of. —Indeed, there required not much
study for my doing so, for I heartily
hated her. —After some time passed in
beseechings on her side, and railings on
mine, one of the pretended constables
took me aside, as if to perswade me to
more moderation, while the other talked
to her, and insinuated as if a sum
of money might compromise the matter. 
—My husband also told her, that
though he detested me for what I had
done, yet he wished her ladyship, for
her own sake, would think of some
way to pacify me;—for,’ said he, ‘a
wife in these cases has great power.’ 
‘The terror she was in of appearing
before a civil magistrate, and of being
liable to suffer that punishment the law
inflicts upon an adultress, and consequently
the loss of all her hopes of a
marriage with you, sir, made her readily
agree to do any thing I should require. 
—I seemed quite averse for a
good while to listen to any terms of
accommodation, but at length affected
to be overcome by the perswasions of
the men I brought with me, and her
promise of allowing us a very handsome
support, as soon as she became your
wife, and should have it in her power. 
—This I made slight on, and told her,
that I would not depend upon her promise
for any thing. —It was then proposed,
that she should give a bond for
a large sum of money to mr. Marplus. 
—‘That you may do with safety,’ 
said he to her, ‘as I shall have it in
my own hands, and you may be assured
will never put it in force to your prejudice.’ 
‘In fine, sir,’ continued mrs. Marplus,
‘she agreed to this proposal, and as it
was then too late for the execution of
what she had promised, on her making
a solemn vow to fulfil it punctually
the next day, I told her, she was at liberty
to go home that night, but that
I would not withdraw the warrant I
pretended to have taken out against her,
till all was over. 
‘She was, indeed, too much rejoiced
at the expectation of getting off from
the imaginary prosecution to think of
breaking her word;—my wicked husband,
however, had the success of his
design more greatly at heart, than to
give her any long time for reflection; 
accordingly we went pretty early the
next morning to her lodgings, accompanied
by one of those, who had assumed 
the character of constable, and
who, in reality, had formerly served
the parish where he still lives in that
capacity, and a lawyer, previously directed
to fill up the bond in the strongest
and most binding terms that words
could form. —There was not the least
demur or objection, on the part of her
ladyship;—she signed her name, and
mrs. Prinks, her woman, and the man
we brought with us, set their hands as
witnesses. 
‘You see, sir,’ pursued she, ‘the drift
of this contrivance, lady Mellasin was
the instrument, but it was you that was
ordained to suffer:—there was no fixed
sum, or sums, stipulated for the support
we were to receive from her; but Marplus
was so continually draining her
purse, that I have often been amazed
by what arts she imposed on you to replenish
it. —Whenever she began to
make any excuse for not complying
with his demands, he presently threatened
her with putting the bond in
force against you, by which means he
extorted from her almost whatever he
required.’ 
‘One time in particular, he pretended
to be under an arrest for three hundred 
pounds, and she not having so much
money by her, was obliged to send mrs.
Prinks, with her diamond necklace, to
the pawn-broker's to make it up;— 
yet,—would you believe it, sir?— 
notwithstanding all he got from her
ladyship, he kept me poor and mean,
as you see;—would not let me have a
servant, but made me wash his linnen,
and do all the drudgery, while he struted
about the town, like a fine fellow,
with his tupee wig, and laced waistcoat,
and if I made the least complaint, would
tell me, in derision, that as I had no
children I had nothing else to do but
to wait upon him. —I bore all this,
however, because I loved the villain,
and, indeed, did not then know he was
so great a one to me, as I now find he
is. 
‘He pretended to me, that he was
heartily weary of lady Mellasin,—hated
her,—and could no longer bear the
pain of dissembling with her. —‘I
will, therefore,’ said he, ‘demand a
much larger sum of her, than I know
it is in her power to raise:—her noncompliance
will give me an excuse for
compelling her husband to pay the penalty
of the bond, and when I have
got the money I will purchase an employment 
in some one or other of the
public offices, on which you and I
may live comfortably together the remainder
of our days.’ 
‘Accordingly, at his next Meeting
with lady Mellasin, he told her, he had
a present occasion for a sum of money,
and she must let him have five hundred
pounds, within four or five days at
farthest. —This, it seems, extremely
alarmed her; she replied, that it was
impossible for her to procure so much
at once,—complained that he had been
too pressing upon her, and told him,
that he ought not to expect she could
always supply his extravagancies in the
manner she had lately done. —High
words arose between them on this account; 
—she reproached him with the
straits he had already put her to,— 
said he must wait till money came into
her hands. —He swore the present exigence
of his affairs required an immediate
supply,—that he saw no remedy
but arresting you, and they parted in
great anger. 
‘The next day he sent me to her with
a letter;—neither she, nor mrs. Prinks,
was at home, and I did not judge proper
to leave it with the servants, so 
carried it back again:—he did not
happen to ask me for it, and I never
thought of returning it, which I am
now very glad of, as it may serve to
corroborate the truth of what I told
you.’ 
In speaking this, she presented a paper
to mr. Goodman, which he took hastily
out of her hands, and found it contained
these words: 

To lady Mellasin.
‘Madam,
Your excuses wont do with me. — 
Money I must have;—I know you
may raise it if you will, and I am
amazed you should imagine I can believe
any thing you say to the contrary,
when you have an old fellow, who,
you yourself told me, knows no end to
his wealth, and that you married him
only to make him my banker. —Do
not, therefore, offer to trifle with me
any longer, for if you do, by my soul
I shall put the bond in force, and then
there will be an end of all love and all
friendship between you and him, who
has been for so many years, 
‘Your constant servant,
O. Marplus.’
Oh! 

“Oh! wretched,—wretched woman!” 
cried mr. Goodman, as soon as he had
done reading,—“to how low,—how
contemptible a state has vice reduced
her!” —Mrs. Marplus, perceiving by
his countenance the distraction of his
mind, would not prosecute her discourse,
till he, recovering himself a little, bid
her go on, if any thing yet remained to
be related of this shocking narrative. 
‘I have told you, sir,’ resumed she,
‘the preparations, the consequence you
are but too well acquainted with. —I
have only to assure you, that I had not
discovered my husband's baseness, but
with a view of your doing yourself justice; 
—you have no occasion to pay
this bond,—you can prove it a fraud
by the joint evidence of myself his wife,
and another person, no less deeply concerned
in the contrivance, and is ready
to make his affidavit of every particular
I have recited;—but then whatsoever
is done, must be done with expedition,
or he will be past the reach, either of
you or me. —I have just now learned,
that instead of purchasing an employment,
as he pretended to me, he is
privately preparing to go over to Holland,
Brussels, or some of those places, 
and settle there with a young hussey,
who, they say, is with child by him,
and will leave me here to starve. His
lawyer, to whom he has assigned the
bond, is to advance fifteen hundred
pounds upon it, on condition he has
the residue of it to himself, when you
shall discharge the whole. Now it is
in your power, sir, to save yourself the
payment of so much money, and relieve
a much injured and distressed wife,
by complaining to the court of Chancery
of the imposition practiced on you,
and procure a Ne exeat regnum to
prevent his escape.’ 
Here she gave over speaking, and mr.
Goodman, after a short pause, replied,
that he could not at that instant resolve
on any thing; but added, that he would
take some advice, and then let her know
how far she might be serviceable to him:
—on which she took her leave, after
giving him directions where she might
be found. 