


Is less pleasing than the former. 

After this solemn parting between
mr. Trueworth and mrs. Munden,
that lady's mind was in too much disorder
to think what was become of the
little picture that had occasioned it, till
an hour or two after, the maid of the
house came running into the chamber
with it in her hand, ‘Does this pretty
picture belong to you, madam,’ said
she:—mrs. Munden started, but soon 

recovering herself, answered it did, said
that it was the picture of her younger
brother, and that she believed she might
pull it out of her pocket with her handkerchief,
or some how or other drop it
in the walk. —Ay, to be sure it was so,’ 
said the maid, ‘for it was there I found
it;—as I was going to the pump for
some water, I saw something that glittered
just by the little arbour, on which
I run, and took it up, but my mistress
told me she believed it was yours, for
she knew your ladyship was in the walk
this morning.’ —‘I am glad thou hast
found it,’ replied mrs. Munden, ‘for it
would have vexed me to the heart to
have lost it.’ —‘Ay, to be sure, madam,’ 
cried she, ‘for it is a sweet picture,
your brother is a handsome gentleman,
I warrant there are a thousand
ladies in love with him.’ —Mrs. munden
could not forbear smiling at the simplicity
of the wench, but willing to be
rid of her rewarded her honesty with a
crown piece, and dismiss'd her. 
She was rejoiced indeed to have this
picture once more in her possession, not
only because some other might have
found, and kept it, but also because she
thought she might indulge herself in
looking on it, without any breach of that
duty, to which she was resolved so strictly 

to adhere:—To be secure however from
a second rencounter with the original in
that place, she kept close in the house,
and stirred not out of it all the time she
was there;—but her apprehensions on
this score were needless:—Mr. Trueworth
religiously observed the promise he
had made her, and lest he should be under
any temptation to break it while so
near her, took leave of his friend that
same day, and returned to London, but
carried with him sentiments very different
from those he had brought down, as will
hereafter appear. 
As to mrs. Munden, she found that
she had no less occasion for exerting the
heroine when alone, than when encircl'd
in the arms of mr. Trueworth:—the
accident, which had betrayed the secret
of her heart to him, had also discovered
it to herself. —She was now convinced,
that it was something more than esteem,
—than friendship,—than gratitude, his
merits had inspired her with;—she was
conscious, that while she most resisted the
glowing pressure of his lips, she had felt
a guilty pleasure in the touch, which had
been near depriving her of doing so, and
that though she had resolved never to see
him more, it would be very difficult to
refrain wishing to be for ever with
him. 

This she thought so highly criminal in
herself, that she ought not to indulge the
remembrance of so dear, so dangerous an
invader of her duty; yet when she considered,
that merely for her sake, and
not through the weak resistance she had
made, his own honour had nobly triumphed
over wild desire in a heart so
young, and amorous as his, it increased
that love and admiration which she in
vain endeavoured to subdue, and she
could not help crying out with Calista,
in the play, 

‘Oh had I sooner known thy wondrous virtue,
‘Thy love, thy truth, thou excellent young man,
‘We might have both been happy.

But to banish as much as possible all
those ideas, which her nicety of honour
made her tremble at, it was her fixed
determination to retire into L&wblank;,
as soon as she had ended her affairs with
her husband, and pass the remainder of
her days, where she should never hear the
too dear name of Trueworth. 
She did not therefore neglect sending
her servant to town, but he returned that
day, and several succeeding ones without
the least intelligence;—no letter nor 

message from mr. Munden having been
left for her at her brother's, on which she
began to imagine, that he never had in
reality intended to put his threats in execution. 
Mr. Markland, in the mean time, had
been twice to wait on him, but the servants
had told him, that their master was
extremely indisposed, and could not be
seen:—this he looked upon as a feint to
put off giving him an answer as he had
promised, and both mr. Thoughtless and
his sister were of the same opinion when
they heard it. —Mr. Markland went again
and again, however, but was still
denied access;—near a whole week passing
over in this manner, mrs. Munden
grew very uneasy, fearing she should be
able to obtain as little justice, as favour
from her husband. 
But guilty as he had been in other repects,
he was intirely innocent in this;— 
the force of the agitation he had of late
sustained, joined to repeated debauches,
had over-heated his blood, and thrown
him into a very violent fever, in so
much that in a few days his life was dispaired
of:—the whispers of all about
him,—the looks of the physician that
attended him, and above all what he felt
within himself, convincing him of the 

danger he was in, all his vices,—his
excesses now appeared to him such as they
truly were, and filled him with a remorse,
which he had been but too much addicted
to ridicule in others;—in fine, the horrors
of approaching dissolution rendered
him one of those many examples, which
daily verify these words of mr. Dryden; 

‘Sure there are none but fear a future state!
‘And when the most obdurate swear they do not,
‘Their trembling hearts bely their boasting tongues.’

Among the number of those faults,
which presented him with the most direfull
images, that of the ill treatment he
had given a wife, who so little deserved
it, lay not the least heavy upon his conscience; 
—he sent his servant to mr.
Thoughtless, at whose house he imagined
she still was, to intreat he would prevail
on her to see him before he died:—but
that gentleman giving a very slight answer,
as believeing it all artifice, he engaged
the apothecary that adminstered to
him, and was known to mr. Thoughtless,
to go on the same errand; on which the
brother of mrs. Munden said, she was
not with him at present, but he would
send to let her know what had happened; 

accordingly he dispatched one of his men
immediatly to her with the following
billet. 

To mrs. Munden.
‘Dear sister,
‘Mr. Cardiack the apothecary assures
me, that your husband is in fact
ill, and in extreme danger;—he is
very pressing to see you:—I will not
pretend to advise you what to do on
this occasion,—you are the best judge; 
I shall only say, that if you think fit to
comply with his request, you must be
speedy, for it seems it is the opinion of
the gentlemen of the faculty, that he is
very near his end. I am, dear sister, 
‘Yours affectionately,
‘T. Thoughtless. 

Not all the indifference she had for
she person of mr. Munden,—not all
the resentment his moroseness and ill-nature
had excited in her, could hinder her
from feeling an extreme shock on hearing
his life was in danger;—she sought
for no excuses, either to evade, or delay
what he desired of her; she went directly
to him, equally inclined to do so
by her compassion, as she thought herself
obliged to do by her duty, 
As she entered the chamber she met 

the apothecary coming out;—in asking
him some questions, though she
spoke very low, mr. Munden thought he
distinguished her voice, and cried out as
loud as he was able, ‘Is my wife here?’ 
On which approaching the bed, and
gently opening one of the curtains,— 
‘Yes, mr. Munden,’ replied she, ‘I am
come to offer you all the assistance in
my power, and am sorry to find you
are in any need of it.’—‘This is very
kind,’ said he, and stretched out one of
his hands towards her, which she took
between her's with a great deal of tender
ness, ‘I have been much to blame, resumed
he, I have greatly wronged you,
but forgive me,—if I live, I will endeavour
to deserve it.’ 
‘I hope, said she, heaven will restore
your health, and that we may live together
in a manner becoming persons
united as we are.’ —‘Then you will
not leave me,’ cried he; ‘Never,’ answered
she, ‘unless your behaviour shall
convince me you do not desire my
stay.’ 
Here he began to make solemn protestations
of future amendment, but his
voice failing him through extreme weakness,
a deep sigh, and tender pressure of
his cheek to her's as she leaned her head 

upon the pillow, gave her to understand
what more he would have said:—on
this she assured him she was ready to believe
every thing he would have her, intreated
him to compose himself, and endeavour
to get a little rest;—‘in the mean
time,’ said she, ‘I will order things so
that I may lie in the same room with
you, and quit your presence neither
night nor day.’ 
Here he pressed his face close to hers
again, in token of the satisfation he felt
in hearing what she said, and the nurse
who attended him that instant, presenting
him with some things the physician
had ordered should be given him about
that hour, joined her entreaties with those
of mrs. Munden, that he would try to
sleep, to which he made a sign that he
would do so;—and the curtains being
drawn, they both retired to the farther
end of the room. 
As he lay pretty quiet for a considerable
time, mrs. Munden recollected, that
there was a thing, which friendship and
good manners exacted from her;—she
had wrote the very day before a letter to
lady Loveit, acquainting her with the
motive, which had obliged her to quit
her brother's house, and desiring she
would favour her with a visit as soon as 

convenience would permit, at the place
of her retirement. —As she doubted not
but the good nature of this lady would
prevail on her to comply with her request,
she could not dispense with sending
her an immediate account of the sudden
revolution in her affairs, and the accident
which had occasioned this second
removal. 
She had no sooner dispatched a little
billet for this purpose, than the groans of
mr. Munden testifying that he was awake,
drew both her and the nurse again to the
bedside:—they found him in very great
agonies, and without the power of speech; 
the doctor and apothecary were sent for
in a great hurry, but before either of them
came, the unhappy gentleman had
breathed his last. 
Mrs. Munden had not affected any
thing more in this interview than what
she really felt;—her virtue and her
compassion had all the effect on her
that love has in most others of her sex; 
she had been deeply troubled at finding
her husband in so deplorable a situation; 
the tenderness he had now expressed for
her, and his contrition for his past faults,
made a great impression on her mind, and
the shock of seeing him depart was truly
dreadful to her;—the grief she appeared 

in was undissembled—the tears
she shed unforced;—she withdrew into
another room, where shutting herself up
for some hours, life, death, and futurity
were the subjects of her meditations. 
