

Is of very small importance, yet contains such things as the reader may expect to hear. 
While mr. Trueworth was employing
himself in exploring the truth
of miss Betsy's imaginary crime, and
hunting after secrets to render her more
unworthy of his love, that young lady's
head was no less taken up with him,
though in a widely different manner;— 
she wanted not a just sense of the merits,
both of his person and passion; and though
a plurality of lovers, the power of flattering
the timid with vain hopes, and
awing the proudest into submission, seemed
to her a greater triumph, than to be
the wife of the most deserving man on
earth, yet when she consulted her heart,
she found, and avowed within herself, she
could part with that triumph, with less
reluctance in favour of mr. Trueworth,
than of any other she yet had seen. 
His absence, therefore, and the strange
neglect he testified in not sending to acquaint 
her with the cause, gave her as
much inquietude, as a person of her humour
could be capable of feeling;—but
whether it proceeded in reality from the
first shootings of a growing inclination,
or from that vanity, which made her
dread the loss of so accomplished a lover,
cannot be easily determined;—but to
which soever of these causes it was owing,
I think we may be pretty certain,
that had he visited her in the situation
her mind then was, he would have had
no reason to complain of his reception. 
She never went abroad without flattering
herself with the expectation of hearing,
on her return home, that he had
been there, or at least that some letter or
message from him had been left for her,
and every disappointment involved her in
fresh perplexity. —In fine, if she had
considered him with half that just regard,
while he continued to think her worthy
of his affections, as she was beginning to
do when he was endeavouring to drive all
favourable ideas of her from his mind,
they might both have been as happy as
at present they were the contrary. 
She had been with miss Mabel, and
two other ladies of her acquaintance, to
see that excellent comedy, called the 
Careless Husband:—she was very much
affected with some scenes in it;—she
imagined she saw herself in the character
of lady Betty Modish, and mr. Trueworth
in that of lord Morelove, and came home
full of the most serious reflections, on the
folly of indulging an idle vanity, at the
expence of a man of honour and sincerity. 
—She was no sooner within the
doors, than the letter above-mentioned
was put into her hands;—as they told
her, it had been left for her in the beginning
of the evening, by one of mr. Trueworth's
servants, and she knew, both by
the superscription, and device on the seal,
that it came from that gentleman, she
ran hastily up stairs to her chamber, in
order to examine the contents;—but
what flutterings seized her heart! — 
What an universal agitation diffused itself
through all her frame, on reading
even the first lines of this cruel epistle! 
“Good heaven!” cried she, “going
out of town,—not to return.” —And
then having proceeded a little further;— 
“What,” added she, “not see me before
he goes,—sure the man is either
mad, or I am in a dream.” 
Surprise, and some mixture of a tender
remorse, were the first emotions of her
foul; but when she came to that part of 
the letter, which seemed to reflect upon
her conduct, and the way in which she
chose to live, her native haughtiness reassumed
its former power, and turned her
all into disdain and rage. —“No retrospect,” 
said she, “on my own behaviour,
can ever justify the audacious
reproaches he treats me with. —If I
have been to blame, it is not his province
to upbraid me with it.” 
As she was entirely ignorant of the
base artifice had been put in practice
against her, and was conscious of no
fault mr. Trueworth had to accuse her of,
but that of her going with miss Forward
to the play, after the warning he had given
her of the danger, it must be confessed,
she had a right to think the provocation
too slight to draw from him such
resentful expressions, much less to induce
him to abandon her. 
“Ungrateful man,” said she, bursting
into tears of mingled grief and spite, “to
use me thus, when I was just beginning
to entertain the kindest thoughts of
him! —When I was ready to acknowledge
the error I was guilty of, in not
following his advice, and had resolved
never to throw myself into such inconveniencies
again. —'Tis plain he never 
loved me, or he would not have taken
so poor,—so trifling a pretence to
break with me.” 
Thus, for some moments, did she bewail,
as it were, the ill treatment she
thought she had received from him. — 
Then looking over the letter again,— 
“With what a magisterial air,” cried
she, “with what an affectation of superiority
does he conclude! —With the
most friendly wishes my humble servant. 
—Good lack!—friendly!— 
let him carry his friendly wishes to
those he may think may receive them
as a favour.” 
Upon revolving in her mind all the
circumstances of her behaviour towards
mr. Trueworth, she could find nothing,
except what passed at his last visit, that
could give him any occasion for disgust,
and even that she looked upon as a very
insufficient plea for that high resentment
he now expressed, much more for his resolving
to throw off a passion he had a
thousand and a thousand times vowed
should be as lasting as his life. 
The anonymous letter sent her by miss
Flora, some time since, now came fresh
into her mind;—that passage in it, 
which insinuated, that mr. Trueworth had
no real design of marrying her,—that
he but trifled with her, and on the arrival
of her brothers would find some
pretence or other to break entirely with
her, seemed now to tally exactly with his
present manner of proceeding. —“The
devil,” said she, “may some time speak
truth,—mr. Trueworth has but
too well verified the words of that
malicious girl, and what she herself
then thought a falshood is now confirmed
by fact;—yet, wherefore,” 
cried she again, “did he take all this
pains, if he never loved me,—never
hoped any recompence for his dissimulation,
what end could he propose by
practising it? —What advantage,
what pleasure could it give him to affront
the sister of his friend, and impose
upon the credulity of a woman
he had no design upon?” —It would
be endless to repeat the many contradictory
surmises, which rose alternately in
her distracted mind, so I shall only say,
she sought, but the more she did so, the
more she became incapable of fathoming
the bottom of this mysterious event. 
The butler was laying the cloth in the
parlour for supper when she came home,
—Mr. Goodman had waited for her some 
time, thinking she might be undressing,
and now sent to desire she would come
down;—but she begged to be excused,
—said she could not eat, and then called
for Nanny, who was the maid that usually
attended her in her chamber, to come up
and put her to bed. 
This prating wench, who would always
know the whole secrets of every body in
the family, whether they thought fit to
entrust her with them or not, used frequently
to divert miss Betsy with her idle
stories; but it was not now in her power,
—that young lady had no attention for
any thing, but the object of her present
meditations, which the other not happening
to hit upon, was answered only with
peevishness and ill humour. 
But as every little circumstance, if any
way adapted to the passion we at that
time are possessed of, touches upon the
jarring string, and seems a missioner from
fate; an accident, the most trifling that
can be imagined, served to renew in miss
Betsy, the next morning, those anxieties,
which sleep had, in some measure, abated. 
A ballad-singer happening to be in the
street, the first thing she heard, on her 
waking, was these words, sung in a sonorous
voice, just under her window: 

 ‘Young Philander woo'd me long,
‘I was peevish, and forbad him;
 ‘I would not hear his charming song,
‘But now I wish, I wish I had him.’

Though this was a song at that time
much in vogue, and miss Betsy had casually
heard it an hundred times, yet in the
humour she now was, it beat an alarm
upon her heart. —It reminded her how
inconsiderate she had been, and shewed
the folly of not knowing how to place a
just value on any thing, 'till it was lost,
in such strong colours before her eyes,
as one would scarce think it possible, an
incident in itself so merely bagatelle could
have produced. 
Again she fell into very deep resveries,
and divesting herself of all passion, pride
and the prejudice her vanity had but too
much inspired her with, she found, that
though mr. Trueworth had carried his resentment
further than became a man,
who loved to that degree, as he pretended
to have done; yet she could no way
justify herself to her brother Frank, lady
Trusty, or any of those friends, who had 
espoused his cause, for having given him
the provocation. 
To heighten the splenetic humour she
was in, mr. Goodman, who having been
taken up with his own affairs, had not
mentioned mr. Trueworth to her for some
days, happened this morning, as they sat
at breakfast, to ask her how the courtship
of that gentleman went on, and whether
there was like to be a wedding, or
not? —Perceiving she blushed,—hung
down her head, and made no answer,— 
“Nay,—nay,”—said he, “I told you
long ago I would not interfere in these
matters, and have less reason now than
ever to do so, as your eldest brother is
in town, and who is doubtless capable
of advising you for the best.” —Miss
Betsy was in a good deal of confusion;— 
she knew not as yet whether it would be
proper for her to acquaint mr. Goodman
with what had passed between mr. Trueworth
and herself, or to be silent on that
head, 'till she should see what a little
time might bring about. —As she was
thinking in what manner she should
reply, mr. Goodman's lawyer, luckily for
her relief, came in, and put an end to a
discourse, which, in the present situation
of her mind, she was very unfit to bear a
part in. 
But as if this was to be a day of continued
admonitions to miss Betsy, she was
no sooner drest, and ready to quit her
chamber, than she heard miss Mabel's
voice upon the stairs. —As that young
lady was not accustomed to make her
any morning visits, she was a little surprised; 
—she ran however to meet her,
saying, “This is a favour I did not expect,
and therefore have the more cause
to thank you.” —“I do not know,” 
replied the other, as she entered the room,
“whether you will think I deserve thanks
or not, when you hear the business that
brought me; for I assure you I am
come only to chide you.” —“I think,” 
said miss Betsy, with a sigh, “that all
the world takes the liberty of doing so
—with me; but pray, my dear,” continued
she, “how am I so unhappy as
to deserve it from you?” 
“Why you must know,” replied miss
Mabel, “that I have taken upon me to
be the champion of distress'd love;— 
you have broken a fine gentleman's
heart, and I am come to tell you,
that you must either make it whole
again, as it was before he saw you, or
repair the damage he has sustained by
giving him your own.” —“I plead, 
not guilty,” said miss Betsy, in a tone
somewhat more sprightly than before,
“but pray, who has gained so great an
influence over you, as to send you on
so doughty an errand?” —“No, my
dear, you are quite mistaken in the
matter,” replied the other,—“I assure
you I am not sent,—I am only
led by my own generosity, and the sight
of poor mr. Trueworth's despair.” — 
“Trueworth!” cried miss Betsy hastily,
“What do you mean?” —“I mean,” 
replied the other, “to engage you, if
the little rhetoric I am mistress of can
prevail on you to consider, that while
we use a man of sense and honour ill,
we do ourselves a real injury. —The
love our beauty has inspired, may, for
a time, secure our power, but it will
grow weaker by degrees, and every
little coquette air we give ourselves,
lessen the value of our charms. —I
know there is at present some very
great brulée between you and mr.
Trueworth;—he is a match every
way deserving of you,—he has the
approbation of all your friends, and I
have heard you acknowledge, you are
not insensible of his merit; to what
end then do you study to perplex and
give unnecessary pain to a heart, which
you, according to all appearances, 
will one day take a pride in rendering
happy?” 
“This is an extreme fine harangue,
indeed,” replied miss Betsy, “but I
would fain know for what reason it is
directed to me;—if mr. Trueworth
imagines I have used him ill, I think
it no proof of his understanding, to
make a proclamation of it;—but, for
heaven's sake, how came you to be
the confidante of his complaints?” 
‘Indeed I have not that honour,” said
miss Mabel; ‘finding myself a little ill
this morning, I thought the air would
do me good, so went into the park,
taking only a little girl with me, who
lives at the next door, because I would
not go quite alone; being in the deshabille
you see, I crossed the grass, and
was passing towards the back of the
bird-cage walk, where who should I see
among the trees but mr. Trueworth,
if I may call the object that then presented
itself to me by that name; for
indeed, miss Betsy, the poor gentleman
seems no more than the shadow of himself. 
—He saw me at a distance, and
I believe would have avoided me, but
perceiving my eyes were upon him,
cleared up his countenance, as well as 
he was able, and accosted me with the
usual salutations of the morning. —‘It
is somewhat surprising, madam,’ said
he, with an air of as much gallantry as
he could assume, ‘to find a lady so
justly entitled to the admiration of the
world, as miss Mabel is, shun the gay
company of the Mall, and choose an
unfrequented walk, like this.’ —‘I
might retort the same exclamation of
surprise,’ replied I, ‘at so unexpectedly
meeting with mr. Trueworth here.’ 
‘After this, as you know, my dear,’ 
continued she, ‘I have lately, on your
account, had the pleasure pretty often of
mr. Trueworth's company, I took the
liberty to ask him where he had buried
himself, that I had not seen him for so
many days:—to which he answered,
not without a confusion, which I saw
he attempted, though in vain, to conceal
from me,—‘Yes, madam, I have
indeed been buried from all pleasure,
—have been swallowed up in affairs
little less tormenting than those of the
grave;—but,’ added he, ‘they are
now over, and I am preparing to return
to my country-seat, where I hope
to re-enjoy that tranquility, which, since
my leaving it, has been pretty much
disturbed.’ 
‘Nothing could equal my astonishment,
at hearing him speak in this manner: 
‘—To your country seat!’ cried I; 
‘not to continue there for any long
time!’ —‘I know not as yet, madam,’ 
replied he, and then, after a pause,
‘perhaps forever,’ added he. —‘Bless
me,’ said I, ‘this is strange indeed,— 
miss Betsy did not tell me a word of
it, and I saw her but last night.’ — 
‘She might not then know it, madam,’ 
answered he; ‘but if she had, I am
not vain enough to imagine, she would
think a trifle, such as my departure,
worth the pains of mentioning.’ 
‘I then,’ pursued miss Mabel, ‘endeavoured
to rally him out of this humour. 
—After having told him,
I had a better opinion of your understanding
and generosity, than to be capable
of believing you thought so lightly
of his friendship and affection, I added,
that this was only some little pique between
you,—some jealous whim; but
he replied to all I said on this subject
with a very grave air, pretended business,
and took his leave somewhat
abruptly, for a man of that politeness,
I had till now always observed in him.’ 
‘He carries it with a high hand, indeed,’ 
cried miss Betsy;—‘but it is
no matter,—I shall give myself no
trouble whether he stays in town,— 
or whether he goes into the country,— 
or whether I ever see him more. — 
What!—does the man think to triumph
over me?’ 
‘I do not believe that is the case with
mr. Trueworth,’ said the discreet miss
Mabel; ‘but I know it is the way of
many men to recriminate in this manner,
—and pray when they do, who
can we blame for it but ourselves in
giving them the occasion? —For my
part, I should think it an affront to
myself to encourage the addresses of a
person, I did not look upon worthy of
being treated with respect.’ 
She urged many arguments to convince
miss Betsy of the vanity and ill consequences
of trifling with an honourable
and sincere passion, which though no
more than what that young lady had
already made use of to herself, and was
fully perswaded in the truth of, she was
not very well pleased to hear from the
mouth of another. 
Though these two ladies perfectly agreed
in their sentiments of virtue and reputation,
yet their dispositions and behaviour
in the affairs of love, were as widely different,
as any two persons possibly could
be;—and this it was, which during the
course of their acquaintance, gave frequent
interruptions to that harmony between
them, which the mutual esteem they had
for each other's good qualities, would
otherwise have rendered perpetual. 