

Affords some very useful and exemplary hints to young persons of both sexes; which if they are not the better and wiser for, it is wholly owing to themselves, and not the fault of the author. 
That only true composing draught, an unforced natural slumber, so effectually lull'd the mind of Jenny that when she arose the next morning the anxieties of the preceding day were scarce remember'd by her; or if they were, it was but to wonder at herself for having yielded to their force. 
‘As I think, said she, that I may be pretty confident the story I was told yesterday has nothing of reality in it, but is a most vile and notorious falshood; how silly was I to give myself any pain concerning either, by whom or on what motive it was invented?’ 
‘There are some people, said she, who seem to be born with a propensity to mischief. I remember that when I was at the boarding-school a thousand little quarrels happen'd between the girls, which were occasion'd merely by the lying insinuations of some among us, who took a wicked pleasure in giving pain to others.’ 
‘Too many in the world, continued she, when arrived at years of maturity, instead of endeavouring to correct, take pains to improve and cultivate this cruel disposition in themselves, till even it becomes a science; and the more vexation they create to those who are so unhappy to be of their acquaintance, the more proofs they imagine they give of their own ingenuity and fertility of invention.’ 
‘How stupid then is it, went she still on, to give ear to every idle tale? It is joining with the adversaries of our peace;—aiding those malicious efforts, and giving them a triumph over us, which otherwise all they could do would never be able to obtain: we certainly ought not to believe ill of any one without the testimony of our own senses to confirm the truth of that report; but more especially it behoves us to reject with the utmost contempt whatever has a tendency to create a disagreement between us and those we love.’ 
Thus did her good understanding and strength of reason enable her to get the better of all these doubts and jealous apprehensions, into which young persons of her sex are for the most part too liable to fall. She past a good deal of time in this sort of conversation with herself; and would not, perhaps, have broke it off so soon, if she had not been interrupted by lady Speck's woman, who came into the chamber to enquire after her health, and to let her know that the ladies waited breakfast for her. 
She obey'd the summons immediately, and appear'd so very sprightly, that lady Speck and her sister had not the least room to imagine that the disorder she had complain'd of the night before had been occasion'd by any thing they had said to her in relation to Jemmy. 
A succession of visitants, one after another, came in all that whole day, some of whom stay'd to accompany them to the long room; but Jenny, who had never fail'd to answer every letter she had received from Jemmy by the very first post, would not now be more remiss; and excusing herself for a few minutes retired to her chamber and wrote to him in the following manner: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
My dear Jemmy,
“I Am very sensible that I am quite wrong to add to the vexation you express, by giving you any knowledge of mine;—yet it is not in my power to forbear telling you, that this delay of your journey hither has involved me in disquiets altogether new to me;—I know not how it is, that I never so much wish'd to see you as I now do.” 
“I should be sorry if you neglected any affairs of consequence on my account; but be assured however, till you come, all the amusements, all the pleasures with which this place abounds, and I am continually surrounded with, will lose their relish and be insipid to me.” 
“Such a confession would seem extremely aukward from the pen of a woman, were we not upon the terms we are, or had we been brought up in a different manner; but from my infancy I have been made to think it was my duty to conceal from you no part of my sentiments; and you have often told me, that the same principles were instilled in you: —As I have the most perfect confidence that you are no less punctual in your obedience to this injunction than myself, I am not afraid or ashamed of giving you all the testimonies of my affection that honour and virtue will permit; and more, I am certain, you will never desire.” 
“I shall say nothing to urge you to as speedy a dispatch as possible of the business that detains you from me; I am too well acquainted with your sincerity to doubt if your heart is not already here, and shall therefore endeavour to console myself till your arrival with your letters, as you tell me you shall do with those you receive from me. I am, 
With an attachment
Which only yourself can break,
My dear Jemmy,
Your most affectionate
And ever faithful
J. Jessamy. 
P. S. “If I have express'd too much impatience in the above, excuse it on the account that hitherto, unaccustom'd to disappointments, I am the less able to sustain them with that fortitude and resignation I ought to do.” 

Having finish'd this little epistle, and given orders that it should be carried to the post-office, she return'd to the company, who by this time were ready to adjourn to the assembly;—she went with them, and few women there appear'd to more advantage than herself. 
Sir Robert Manley, to whom neither lady Speck nor miss Wingman had related any part of the rebuff they had received from Jenny on his score, was very impatient to make a declaration of his passion to her; but though he had seen her three times that day at home,—in the walks,—and at the assembly, yet no opportunity proper for his purpose had presented itself. 
He complain'd of his ill luck to lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove, who, after consulting with the ladies what could be done for the advancement of the interest of their friend in this point, it was so contrived amongst them, that she should be left alone with him as if by accident. 
But this could not be done with so much art as to elude the discernment of Jenny; she easily perceived with what intent first one and then another slipt out of the room, till none but herself and sir Robert were left in it. She could not help smiling within herself to think that all this mighty pains was taken only to shew sir Robert that he had nothing to hope for from her; and was not at all displeased with having it in her power to convince that gentleman, that the affection between herself and Jemmy was too strongly cemented to be shaken by the amorous attacks of any pretender whatsoever. 
I am afraid that, on computation, the number of those ladies would be found but small, who, in this giddy and unthinking age, are not fond of making new conquests; though render'd, by even the most solemn engagements, utterly incapable of accepting the trophies presented them: —Jenny, however, had nothing of this vanity in her composition,—she had heard and read much of the effects of love, and the fatal consequences which had sometimes attended a disappointed flame; and therefore had always consider'd that passion as a thing of too serious a nature to be sported with; and that it was an action highly ungenerous and cruel to encourage the growth of it in any heart, without having the power or inclination of making an adequate return. 
Sir Robert Manley was a person whose addresses might have gratify'd the pride of any woman, who placed her glory in seeing herself admired: Jenny was sensible of his merit, but the more she was so, the more she thought herself obliged to prevent him at once from indulging any fruitless expectations. 
He had no sooner made her an offer of his heart, and was just beginning to assure her how much, and how eternally he was devoted to her, than she stopp'd the progress of his declaration, by asking him, with a very reserved air,—If he were really in earnest? —To which he answering in the affirmative, and annexing the most solemn protestation of the truth,—‘Then sir, said she, I am equally sorry and astonish'd, that a gentleman of so much good sense and honour in other things, should forget himself so far as to entertain any thoughts of this kind for a woman, who, he cannot but have heard, has from her very birth been allotted for another.’ 
The manner in which these words were deliver'd giving a double energy to the meaning of them, had a prodigious effect on the person to whom they were directed;—though a man of great presence of mind,—bred in high life, and perfectly acquainted with the world, he could not keep himself from being a little abash'd at receiving so grave and so severe a reprimand from a lady of Jenny's years and inexperience. 
But soon recovering himself,—‘Madam, said he,—I beg you will do me the justice to believe, that however ardent my passion is, I would scorn to attempt the gratification of it by any ways which my honour or my reason should condemn:—that I love you, is most true; yet would I chuse rather to consume through the force of an inextinguishable flame, than to make the least encroachment either on your virtue or your peace.’ 
‘I do not indeed deny, continued he, but that I have been told somewhat concerning an agreement made for you in your extreme youth; but as no consequence has since happen'd of that agreement, I flatter'd myself that your heart approv'd not of the choice made for you,—was at full liberty to elect for itself, and that no impediment lay in the way of my ambition, but my own unworthiness of obtaining so inestimable a jewel.’ 
He concluded these words with a deep sigh, and a bow full of the greatest tenderness and respect; the grateful soul of Jenny was a little touch'd at his behaviour, and she immediately replied with an extreme sweetness;—‘Were there no other bar than what you last mention'd, sir, said she, I believe there are few women, of any penetration at least, to whom your heart would be an unacceptable present; and I shall rejoice to see it bestow'd where equal worth and unpre-engaged affections may crown the utmost of its wishes. 
‘Ah, madam! cry'd sir Robert, Why is this enchanting goodness lavish'd on a man who cannot thank the bounty? All my desires, alass! are center'd in yourself; and to wish me happy with any other object, is but to wish me wretched. —But tell me,—tell me, pursued he, —Are you in earnest, absolutely determined to give your hand to this too fortunate rival? Is it a thing mutually resolved between you? 
Jenny, knowing very well what he had been inform'd of concerning the supposed infidelity of Jemmy, was charm'd with his politeness in imputing the delay of their nuptials rather to an indifference on her side than a dislike on his; and now more desirous than ever of entirely stifling all fallacious hopes, which in the end might prove destructive to his peace, compell'd her modesty to confess to him, that she really loved Jemmy, and that her inclinations would have prefer'd him to all the men in the world, even though they had not been destined for each other by their parents. 
Sir Robert could not hear this declaration without pain; but being fully persuaded in his mind, by what lord Huntley, mr. Lovegrove and others had assured him, that Jemmy but ill repaid the tenderness of his fair mistress, he assumed courage enough to offer a second petition to her consideration. 
‘Well madam, said he, after a little pause, I will not presume to call in question the merits of the man whom you are pleased to favour, I will believe him as deserving as I am sure he is happy; yet if any accident, yet unforeseen, should happen to disunite you, if any thing, impossible as it may seem, should render him ungrateful for the blessing he enjoys, might I not hope my love, my truth, my perseverance, would in time find some room in a corner of that heart which doubtless then would have exterminated its first ideas.’ 
This insinuation was far from working the effect it was intended for; Jenny was highly offended at it, and turning from him with somewhat of a disdainful air; ‘To demand a promise, said she, on suppositions without foundation, is so chymerical as scarce deserves an answer; but sir Robert, on this you may depend, that whenever mr. Jessamy shall prove unworthy of my love, I shall, instead of giving him a successor in my heart, detest and avoid all mankind for ever.’ 
Sir Robert was now conscious he had gone too far, and desirous of perserving her esteem, if he could not gain her affection, endeavoured all he could to excuse the rashness of his late suggestion, which possibly he succeeded in better than he imagined, as Jenny was sensible it was wholly owing to the base reports that had been raised; she would not however, seem to forgive too easily any reflection cast upon her dear Jemmy, but continued in the same serious deportment till the return of the company put an end to all discourse between them on this score. 
