

Treats only on such matters as it is highly probable some readers will be apt to say might have been recited in a more laconic manner, if not totally omitted; but as there are others, the author imagines much the greater number, who may be of a different opinion, it is judged proper that the majority should be obliged. 
Jemmy, to whom the riddle of mr. Kelsey's disagreement with his wife was now fully explain'd, no sooner found himself at home and alone, than he began to make the serious reflections both on the accident he had been witness of, and the real source from whence such unfortunate effects were originally derived. 
‘It is not, said he within himself, it is not youth, beauty, wealth, nor even a mutual affection in the parties before marriage, that is sufficient to constitute their happiness, when once enter'd into that state; neither mr. Kelsey nor his wife are wanting in any of those endowments or accomplishments which one should think necessary to endear them to each other; yet how miserable are they! it must therefore be, that a conformity of principles, a parity of sentiments and humours, and a certain sympathy of soul, ought to be the first links in the hymeneal chain; and without them, all the others fall to the ground and have no power to bind. 
‘I think, continued he, that my friend has every requisite for making a good husband, were it his lot to have been united to a woman of his own gay temper; and the lady, who now creates such uneasiness both to herself and him, would certainly have made no less excellent a wife had she been married to an enthusiast.’ 
On reasoning farther, under various discontents that so frequently disturb'd the felicity of conjugal life, he concluded, that good nature and similitude of dispositions, tho' the last things consider'd, and seldom if ever enquired into by the persons about to be united, were indeed the chief ingredients to make their future happiness. 
These considerations led him into an examination of Jenny's behaviour, even from her infancy, with much greater attention than ever he had done before; and the more he did so now, the less he could find to wish were chang'd; nothing had ever appear'd in her which seem'd to him to stand in need of the least rectification; she had never betray'd a too strong attachment to any one thing; no caprice, no whimsical flights, no affectation, no pride of exciting the envy of her own sex, or of giving pain to those of the other; in all her words and actions she preserved the happy medium of neither being too gay and giddy, nor too sullen and reserv'd; nor was all this mere outward shew; he could not suspect her of disguise, as he had known her before she could arrive at the power, even if she had the will, of pretending to be other than she really was. 
Though he was in no haste to be married; yet, as he intended nothing more than being so, one time or other, great cause had he to thank heaven for being so peculiarly propitious in the lot ordain'd for him; nor was he insensible or ungrateful for the bounty, and had so true an esteem and affection for his dear Jenny, that we may almost give it to the reader for a certainty, that no temptation whatever could have made him entertain the least thought of any other woman for a wife. 
He went pretty early the next morning to her apartment, which he seldom fail'd to do, when he had no farther business than to give her the bon jour; but never when he had any thing to communicate in relation to the agreement made between them: he knew indeed, that she had very little occasion for any lessons of improvement from the faults of others; but he took an infinite pleasure in hearing the judicious observations she always made on every occurrence that presented itself to her. 
He met her at the door, her chair waited, and she was just ready to step into it, ‘You are going out, I perceive, said he, and I will not detain you:’ ‘Indeed but you shall, reply'd she; I was only going to chapel, which I can do as well in the afternoon. 
‘But how, rejoin'd he, shall I answer to myself for being an impediment to any act of religion?’ Religion, cried she, does not enjoin us to be rude or unkind to our friends; and I know not if a just observance of the duties of social life be not a more acceptable sacrifice to the Deity than all the oraisons our lips can utter.’ 
She said no more; but having dismiss'd the chairmen made Jemmy go up stairs, where she instantly follow'd him; as soon as they were sat down, ‘I dined yesterday, said he smiling, with a lady who would have thought herself guilty of the extremest impiety and prophaness to have shewn half that complaisance to her husband, which I have just now received from you. 
‘She must then have very little affection for him indeed, replied Jenny; and also be equally ignorant of the laws of the institution by which, as I take it; she is bound to oblige and to obey him in all reasonable things; but I see, continued she, by your countenance that you are big with some new intelligence; so pray don't delay letting me have it.’ 
Jemmy then made her an exact recital of the entertainment he had met with at mr. Kelsey's; the brulee between the husband and the wife; the impatience of the one, and the provocation given for it by the other: Jenny laugh'd heartily at the beginning of this story, but grew more grave towards the latter end of it, and perceiving he had concluded, gave her sentiments on what he had been telling her in these terms: 
‘Can any one take this for piety, said she? I would not be so uncharitable as to think mrs. Kelsey an hypocrite, but certainly such a behaviour has nothing in it of the air of true devotion.’ To which he reply'd, that he must do her the justice to believe, from what he could gather from the discourse he had afterwards with her husband, who was not in a disposition to be more favourable than the occasion requir'd, that all the mistakes she is guilty of proceed intirely from too warm a zeal in what she thinks the duties of religion. 
‘There are hours enough, said she, to be spent in prayer, without breaking in upon those which the economy of the family requires; I am far from depreciating religious worship, but there are times for all things, and mrs. Kelsey makes choice of such as are so utterly improper, as if it really arises from piety, renders it, in my opinion, such a kind of piety as has little merit in it. 
‘I am rather afraid, continued she after a pause, that through sloth, and a certain indolence of nature, she neglects paying that tribute to heaven which is due from every reasonable creature at fit times; and at length, remembering her omission, runs to wipe off one fault by committing a still greater; for I would fain know, whether driving a husband to the extremes you say mr. Kelsey is guilty of, be not a much worse error than even not praying at all? 
‘For my part, added she with a more gay air, I should have no notion of saving my own soul by doing what I saw would infallibly ruin another's; especially that of a person in whose happiness, both here and hereafter, I ought to take so great an interest.’ 
Jemmy had a very high regard both for the mysteries and duties of reveal'd religion; though, like most other gay gentlemen of his age, he was little practis'd in the rules: but had he been a more strict observer of church discipline, he could not well have disapproved of the sentiments Jenny had declared; he told her she had argued like a casuist, and that he was sure there was never a Clergyman in England but must agree with her on this point. 
‘I do not know that, answer'd she; but I can tell you I durst not speak in the manner I have done, without thinking I had sufficient authority for it, from a little account given to my father, by a very learned and worthy divine, of one of his parishoners; I was very young when I heard it, but as it has made a lasting impression upon my mind, if you will afford me your attention I will repeat it.’ 
Jemmy having assured her she would confer a very great obligation on him by so doing, she went on with her discourse in this manner: 
‘The reverend gentleman I have mention'd, said she, was not only an excellent preacher but also an excellent man; all his actions were so many precepts, and his example a kind of living law; for there was no virtue which he laboured to inspire in others that he did not in the highest degree put in practice himself. 
‘He frequently favour'd my father with his company, continued she, they were extremely intimate, and when the two good old gentlemen got together there never was any gap in conversation: one evening, in particular, he came to our house and my father, who was at church that day, and found a very thin congregation, was beginning to lament to him the decay of religion; to which the doctor reply'd in these terms; I think I remember his very words.’ 
‘Aye, mr. Jessamy, said he, I am afraid indeed that religion is at a very low ebb at this time; but we must not always impute the want of it to those who we do not see constantly at public worship, even though we should know they were not detain'd from it by any infirmity either of mind or of body; there are a thousand accidents which may intervene, and withhold them from the discharge of this duty; nay, in some cases it may so happen that it is even laudable to be absent: you look surprised, mr. Jessamy, continued he, perceiving my father did so; but I can easily convince you of the truth of what I say: I came now from visiting a lady, who till within this month, or thereabouts, has not been at church for near seven years; though before that time no body more constantly attended; and yet I firmly believe that there is not a better or a more pious woman in the world.’ 
These last words were far from lessening the astonishment my father had been in from the beginning of this discourse; but he would not interrupt the doctor, who went on thus: 
‘To ease you of that suspence which I find I have raised in you, said he, know, mr. Jessamy, that this excellent lady flew not from divine service to pursue the pleasures of the town, nor to gratify any sensual inclination of her own, but to shut herself up in a close room with an aged parent, who, press'd beneath the weight of years and infirmities, unable to go out herself, and equally unwilling to receive any visits from those who knew her in a more sanguine state, had no consolation but in the dutiful cares of this beloved daughter, who was continually employ'd about her administering every thing in her power for her relief.’ 
‘It is impossible for me, said Jenny, pursuing the thread of her discourse, to remember half the encomiums he made on this act of filial piety; but this I know, that I have ever since been fully convinced, that while we are here upon earth all the prayers we can make to heaven will be insufficient to attone for neglecting to discharge, as well as is in our power, the duties of our several stations.’ 
Jemmy was now about to tell her how much his opinion, in this point, coincided with what she had deliver'd; but she happen'd to be in a very talkative humour, and this being a subject which in her serious moments had frequently occurr'd to her, she would not quit it for the sake of hearing any praises given to herself. 
‘There are some people, resumed she, who are hypocrites without knowing themselves that they are so; they fast, they pray incessantly, they are abundant in giving to charitable uses, and do many other great and laudable actions; but then they do them not so much for the sake of the religion that enjoins us to do all the good we can, as for the sake of gratifying their own vanity in being able to perform more than their neighbours.’ 
‘This is ostentation, cried Jemmy, interrupting her, and I am afraid that too many of those great actions, so hyperbolically extoll'd in panegyrick, if search'd into the bottom, would be found to proceed from no other source.’ 
‘Ostentation, answer'd she, is different from the propensity I mean; ostentation, as I take it, is rather an ambition of appearing better in the eyes of others than we either are or will take any pains to be in fact; but what I am speaking of is an innate triumph of the heart; a mental exultation within ourselves in the imagination that we in reality excel other people; and this I think may be call'd a spiritual pride. 
‘I have heard such strange stories, continued Jenny, such unaccountable instances in relation to this same spiritual pride among the nuns abroad, as I should have look'd upon to have been mere inventions to depreciate and ridicule that way of worship, if they had not been solemnly averr'd to me by a lady who is herself a roman catholic, was two years a pensioner in a monastery at Paris, and an eye witness of the truth of what she said.’ 
Here she was preparing to repeat some of those particulars which the lady had made her acquainted with; but was prevented by a servant who came into the room to call her down to dinner, on which Jemmy, as she was a boarder, took his leave probably with less reluctance if the subject they had been engaged in had happened to be one of a more entertaining nature. 
Nor will the reader find any reason to be greatly dissatisfied at the breaking off a conversation which could be little improving, as an excess of devotion is not among the reigning errors of the present times. 
