
Contains the Sequel of lady Hardy's Story, with other matters of Some consequence. 
“After my old Baronet had left me, said she, and I had leisure to reflect on what had pass'd, though I was far from repenting of having refused the offer he had made of living with him; yet, to confess the truth, I thought there was no necessity for my giving myself the grand airs I had done, and that I might have taken the gold he would have forced upon me, without any breach either of my modesty or virtue; but this it was which, as he has since told me, gave him so high an opinion of my spirit and delicacy, as made him think me worthy 
of the dignity he was determined to raise me to. 
“The third day after that in which he had been with me, a man and horse arrived from my father, with orders to bring me home directly. —I cannot tell whether myself or uncle were most surprised at this message, but am certain that both of us were very much so. —‘Sure, said he, brother does not intend to take her from me without letting me know that I might provide for myself.’ 
‘I can say nothing as to that, reply'd the fellow; but I believe she will not come back in haste; for he bid me tell her she must bring all the things away that she has here.’ —This convincing him that my father had indeed took it into his head to keep me at home, he complained bitterly of his unkindness, and asked the man a thousand questions concerning my being sent for so suddenly away, in none of which the other was able to give him any satisfaction. 
“I was all this while in tears, which my uncle, poor man, imputed to my good-nature and sorrow for leaving him 
thus destitute; but alas they proceeded from a cause very different from what he imagined,—that of being obliged to remove so much farther from the only place where I could ever hope to see my dear Jessamy again. 
“But there was no remedy,—the orders I had received must be submitted to;—I therefore went up to my room,—pack'd up my little wardrobe, which I gave to the man to put before him,—took leave of my uncle,—got upon the pillion, and with an aking heart trotted towards home as fast as the horse thus loaded could carry us. 
“On my arrival I found my father waiting at the door to receive me,—he lifted me off the horse himself,—kiss'd me,—said I was a good girl for making such haste to come when he sent for me;—in fine, I never remember to have seen him in such a humour in my whole life:—my mother was the same,—she catch'd me in her arms as soon as she saw me, and cried,”—‘My dear Celia, thou wert born to be a blessing to us all.’ —“I was strangely surprised at all this complaisance and joy; but as my parents made many 
circumlocutions in discourse before they informed me of the motive, I will tell it you in a more brief manner. 
“Sir Thomas Hardy, it seems, had been with my father,—told him he had seen me at my uncle's,—that he liked me, and if he would give his consent would marry me as soon as things could be got ready for that purpose. —You may be sure my father did not make many words to this bargain; and it was agreed between them that I should be immediately sent for home, in order to be cloathed according to the station I was going to enjoy. 
“The astonishment I was in at hearing all this is impossible to be express'd; I shall therefore only say, that it was such as almost turn'd my brain, and for a good while allowed me not the power of knowing whether I was most pleased or troubled at an event so prodigious. 
“Early the next morning a servant belonging to my lover brought me a portmanteau, in which I found several rolls of various colour'd silks,—a great deal of lace and dresden work, with some pieces of holland of an extraordinary 
fineness;—in the portmanteau was also a small ivory casket, containing a gold repeating watch and equipage,—a set of diamond buckles for my stays,—a large pearl necklace with a solitaire, and several other trinkets of a considerable value. 
“You may believe, continued she, that my eyes were dazzled with the sight of such things as I had never seen in my whole life before; but I had scarce time to examine them thoroughly before sir Thomas came himself to visit me;—he told me he was glad to see me at home, and ask'd me how I liked the presents he had made;—I was very much confounded, but had courage enough to reply,—that I liked them very well, especially as they were accompanied with honourable intentions:—this answer pleased him so much that he could not forbear taking me in his arms, though my father and mother were in the room, saying at the same time,—my dear girl, I can have nothing for thee but the most honourable intentions; and what I have given thee now are mere trifles in comparison of what I will hereafter make thee mistress of. 
“He staid with us near two hours, and before he went away gave my mother fifty guineas, to pay for making my cloaths, and to provide for me such other things as she should find necessary, earnestly recommending to her to get all ready for our marriage with as much speed as possible. 
“He might have spared himself the trouble of this injunction, for never were two people more eagerly anxious for any thing than my poor father and mother to see me disposed of in a manner so infinitely beyond all they could have hoped:—the persons employ'd in equipping me were so much press'd and so well paid, that in a very few days nothing was wanting for my nuptials, which were celebrated by the parson of the parish at my father's house, after which, I was carried to that which is now my home, and as pleasant a seat as any in the whole county. 
“During the first week of our marriage my head was so taken up with the coach and six,—number of my servants,—the magnificence of every thing about me,—the tice of my ladyship, and the 
compliments made on that occasion, that I thought of nothing but my new grandeur;—but all these things became less dazling to me as they grew more customary, and all my relish for them vanish'd with their novelty. 
“The idea of my dear Jessamy now return'd to my remembrance,—I sigh'd,—I languish'd, and thought I could have exchang'd all my present opluence for one soft hour of love with that first and only charmer of my soul. 
“My husband's fondness for me increased every day;—but alas! The endearments of a man of his years are rather disgustful than agreeable; and I have often wish'd, that as it is impossible I should ever have any love for him, that he had less for me, in spite of the advantages I receive by it. 
“In this fashion, my dear Jessamy, added she, I past two whole years,—quite hopeless of ever tasting more substantial joys, till business calling sir Thomas to London, chance has blest me with the sight of him who never has been absent from my mind.” 
Jemmy, perceiving she had done, thank'd her for the gratification of his curiosity, and the share he had in her remembrance; and then reminded her that at their last meeting in the wood she had made a promise to him which he had now a right to claim the performance of. 
“If I had not intended to pay my debt, reply'd she with a smile, I should certainly have avoided the presence of my creditor. —‘When then, cried he, where shall we meet? for I suppose this is no proper place for the continuance of our interviews.’ 
“You are mistaken, said she, mrs. Comode and I know each other perfectly well;—sir Thomas carried me to Tunbridge last year,—she kept a shop there at that time,—I bought all my things of her, and we soon grew very intimate;—on my coming to town I renewed my acquaintance with her; and I am very sure of her readiness to oblige me in every thing I desire. 
“It falls out a little unlucky, indeed, pursued she, that we could not go up stairs to day;—but it seems some other company had appointed to drink tea 
there before mrs. Comode knew any thing of our coming.” 
He then begg'd she would prefix a time for their happy meeting;—on which she told him that she was to go the next morning to see Windsor-Castle, and that sir Thomas proposed staying there two or three days; but that as soon as they return'd he might be sure she would fly to her dear Jessamy with a transport at least equal to his own. 
‘But how shall I be appriz'd, cried he, how know when to expect the blissful moment?’ —“I have a contrivance for that, answer'd she; I will send a little note to mrs. Comode, which you may either call for here, or she shall leave for you on your giving her your directions.” 
‘I will not put her to that trouble, said he, nor fail to wait on her every morning till the dear mandate shall arrive.’ —“Then I will take care, rejoin'd she, to send the evening before in order to prevent you from being previously engaged elsewhere.” 
Jemmy was beginning to express himself in a very tender manner on this 
occasion, when the door immediately flew open and a lady rush'd into the room;—perceiving company there she staid not a quarter of a minute, yet long enough to put them both into a good deal of confusion, especially Jemmy, who by this momentary glance discover'd she was one whom he had often seen with Jenny. 
This was indeed that same officious friend who had told Jenny the manner in which she had surprised him; but had he known with what moderation that young lady received the intelligence, it would have added, if possible, to the love and admiration he had for her. 
But whatever vexation this accident might give him on his own account, he took care to conceal it under the appearance of his great concern for the reputation of his dear lady Hardy, who, after the first hurry of her spirits was over, seem'd perfectly easy, and endeavoured to make him so,—saying, that as she had been but three weeks in the town, and knew very few people in it, she did not apprehend any danger from this intrusion. 
He gave but little attention to what she said on this subject,—second thoughts 
made him repent his promise of calling every day at mrs. Comode's, as there was more than a possibility of being met there again by the lady who had just left them, or of being seen by some other of Jenny's acquaintance. 
As soon as mrs. Comode had got rid of her customer, she came in and made an apology for what had happen'd, by relating the accident of the garter, as the lady had told it to her, assuring them withal, that the next time they did her the honour of a visit she would take care they should not be interrupted. 
Lady Hardy then told her they had been settling a correspondence together, and was going to say in what manner it was to be conducted; but Jemmy prevented her by crying out,—‘Hold, madam, business or company may detain me from receiving your ladyship's commands so soon as they arrive,—I should be glad therefore that mrs. Comode would be at the pains to send them directly to me.’ 
The obliging shopkeeper reply'd, that she should always take a pleasure in serving lady Hardy or any of her friends;—on which he told her his name, and that of the street wherein he lived. 
After this nothing material pass'd, and lady Hardy not judging it proper to stay abroad too long, the lovers separated with a mutual expectation of seeing each other again at the same place in a few days. 
