

Clarence Hervey's packet contained
a history of his connexion with
Virginia St. Pierre.
To save our hero from the charge of
egotism, we shall relate the principal circumstances
in the third person.
It was about a year before he had seen
Belinda, that Clarence Hervey returned
from his travels; he had been in France
just before the revolution, when luxury
and dissipation were at their height in
Paris, and when a universal spirit of licentious
gallantry prevailed. Some circumstances,
in which he was personally interested,
disgusted him strongly with the
Parisian belles; he felt, that women, who
were full of vanity, affectation, and artifice,

whose tastes were perverted, and
whose feelings were depraved, were equally
incapable of conferring, or enjoying real
happiness. Whilst this conviction was full
in his mind, he read the works of Rousseau:
this eloquent writer's sense made it's full
impression upon Clarence's understanding,
and his declamations produced more than
their just effect upon an imagination naturally
ardent. He was charmed with the
picture of Sophia, when contrasted with
the characters of the women of the world,
with whom he had been disgusted; and
he formed the romantic project of educating
a wife for himself. Full of this idea,
he returned to England, determined to
carry his scheme immediately into execution; 
but he was some time delayed, by
the difficulty of finding a proper object
for his purpose: it was easy to meet with
beauty in distress, and ignorance in poverty; 
but it was difficult to find simplicity
without vulgarity, ingenuity without
cunning, or even ignorance without prejudice; 
it was difficult to meet with an understanding

totally uncultivated, yet likely
to reward the labour of late instruction; 
a heart wholly unpractised, yet full of sensibility,
capable of all the enthusiasm of
passion, the delicacy of sentiment, and
the firmness of rational constancy. It is
not wonderful, that Mr. Hervey, with
such high expectations, should not immediately
find them gratified. Disappointed
in his first search, he did not, however,
relinquish his design, and at length, by
accident, he discovered, or thought that
he discovered, an object formed expressly
for his purpose.
One fine evening in autumn, as he was
riding through the New Forest, charmed
with the picturesque beauties of the place,
he turned out of the beaten road, and
struck into a fresh track, which he pursued
with increasing delight, till the setting
sun reminded him, that it was necessary
to postpone his farther reflections on forest
scenery, and that it was time to think of
finding his way out of the wood. He
was now in the most retired part of the

forest, and he saw no path to direct him,
but, as he stopped, to consider which way
he should turn, a dog sprang from a
thicket, barking furiously at his horse:
his horse was high spirited, but he was
master of him, and obliged the animal
to stand quietly till the dog, having
barked himself hoarse, retreated of it's own
accord. Clarence watched, to see which
way it would go, and followed it, in hopes
of meeting with the person, to whom it
belonged: he kept his guide in sight, till
he came into a beautiful glade, in the
midst of which was a neat, but very small
cottage, with numerous bee-hives in the
garden, surrounded by a profusion of rose
trees, which were in full blow. This cultivated
spot was strikingly contrasted with
the wildness of the surrounding scenery.
As he came nearer, Mr. Hervey saw a
young girl watering the rose trees, which
grew round the cottage, and an old woman
beside her, filling a basket with the
flowers. The old woman was like most
other old women, except, that she had a

remarkably benevolent countenance, and
an air, that had been acquired in better
days; but the young girl did not appear
to Clarence like any other young girl that
he had ever seen. The setting sun shone
upon her countenance, the wind blew aside
the ringlets of her light hair, and the blush
of modesty overspread her cheeks, when
she looked up at the stranger. In her
large blue eyes, there was an expression of
artless sensibility, with which Mr. Hervey
was so powerfully struck, that he remained
for some moments silent, totally forgetting,
that he came to ask his way out of
the forest. His horse had made so little
noise upon the soft grass, that he was
within a few yards of them, before he was
perceived by the old woman. As soon as
she saw him, she turned abruptly to the
young girl, put the basket of roses into
her hand, and bid her carry them into the
house. As she passed him, the girl, with
a sweet innocent smile, held up the basket
to Clarence, and offered him one of the
roses.

“Go in, Rachel!—go in, child;” said
the old woman, in so loud and severe a
tone, that both Rachel and Mr. Hervey
started; the basket was overturned, and
the roses all scattered upon the grass.
Clarence, though he attempted some apology,
was by no means concerned for the
accident, as it detained Rachel some instants
longer to collect her flowers, and
gave him an opportunity of admiring her
finely shaped hands and arms, and the ease
and natural grace of her motions.
“Go in, Rachel,” repeated the old
woman, in a still more severe tone; “leave
the roses there—I can pick them up, as
well as you, child—go in.”
The girl looked at the old woman with
astonishment, her eyes filled with tears,
and throwing down the roses, that she
held in her hand, she said, “I am going,
grandmother.” The door closed after her,
before Clarence recollected himself sufficiently,
to tell the old lady how he had lost
his way, &c. Her severity vanished,
as soon as her grandaughter was safe in

the house, and with much readiness she
showed him the road for which he inquired.
As soon, however, as it was in his
power, he returned thither, for he had
taken such good note of the place, that
he easily found his way to the spot, which
appeared to him a terrestrial paradise. As
he descended into the valley, he heard the
humming of bees, but he saw no smoke
rising from the cottage chimney—no dog
barked—no living creature was to be seen
—the house door was shut—the window
shutters closed—all was still. The place
looked as if it had been deserted by its
inhabitants—the roses had not been
watered, many of them had shed their
leaves; and a basket, half full of dead
flowers, was left in the middle of the
garden. Clarence alighted, and tried the
latch of the door, but it was fastened; he
listened, but heard no sound; he walked
round to the back of the house: a small
lattice window was half open, and, as he
went toward it, he thought he heard a

low moaning voice; he gently pulled aside
the curtain, and peeped in at the window.
The room was darkened, his eyes had
been dazzled by the sun, so that he could
not, at first, see any object distinctly; but
he heard the moaning repeated, at intervals,
and a soft voice at last said—
“O, speak to me!—speak to me, once
again—only once—only once again, speak
to me!”
The voice came from a corner of the
room, to which he had not yet turned his
eyes; and as he drew aside more of the
curtain, to let in more light, a figure
started up from the side of a bed, at
which she had been kneeling, and he saw
the beautiful young girl, with her hair all
dishevelled, and the strongest expression
of grief in her countenance. He asked,
if he could do her any service. She
beckoned to him to come in, and then,
pointing to the bed, on which the old woman
was stretched, said—
“She cannot speak to me—she cannot
move one side—she has been so these

three days—but she is not dead—she is
not dead!”
The poor creature had been struck with
the palsy. As Clarence went close to the
bed, she opened her eyes, and fixing them
upon him, she stretched out her withered
hand, caught fast hold of her granddaughter,
and then raising herself, with a
violent effort, she pronounced the word,
“Begone!” Her face grew black, her
features convulsed, and she sunk down
again in her bed, without power of utterance.
Clarence left the house instantly,
mounted his horse, and gallopped to the
next town for medical assistance. The
poor woman was so far recovered by a skilful
apothecary, that she could, in a few
days, articulate so as to be understood.
She knew, that her end was approaching
fast, and seemed piously resigned to her
fate. Mr. Hervey went constantly to see
her; but, though grateful to him for his
humanity, and for the assistance he had
procured for her, yet she appeared agitated
when he was in the room, and frequently

looked at him, and at her grandaughter,
with uncommon anxiety. At last, she
whispered something to the girl, who immediately
left the room; and she then
beckoned to him, to come closer to the
arm chair, in which she was seated.
“May be, sir,” said she, “you thought
me out of my right mind, the day when
I was lying on that bed, and said to you,
in such a peremptory tone—Begone!—It
was all I could say then—and, in truth, I
cannot speak quite plain yet; nor ever
shall again. But God's will be done. I
had only one thing to say to you, sir,
about that poor girl of mine—”
Clarence listened to her with eagerness.
She paused, and then laying her cold
hand upon his, she looked up earnestly in
his face, and continued—
“You are a fine young gentleman, and
you look like a good gentleman, but so
did the man who broke the heart of her
poor mother. Her mother was carried off
from a boarding-school, when she was
scarcely sixteen, by a wretch, who, after

privately marrying her, would not own his
marriage, staid with her but two years,
then went abroad, left his wife and his infant,
and has never been heard of since.
My daughter died of a broken heart.— 
Rachel was then between three and four
years old, a beautiful child.—God forgive
her father!—God's will be done!”—She
paused, to subdue her emotion, and then,
with some difficulty, proceeded.—
“My only comfort is, I have bred
Rachel up in innocence; I never sent her
to a boarding-school.—No, no; from the
moment of her birth, till now, I have kept
her under my own eye. In this cottage
she has lived with me, away from all the
world. You are the first man she ever
spoke to; the first man who ever was
within these doors. She is innocence
itself!—O, sir! as you hope for mercy,
when you are as I am now, spare the
innocence of that poor child!—Never
never come here after her, when I am
dead and gone! Consider, she is but a
child, sir.—God never made a better creature.

—O, promise me you will not be
the ruin of my sweet innocent girl, and I
shall die in peace!”
Clarence Hervey was touched. He instantly
made the promise required of him; 
and, as nothing less would satisfy the poor
dying woman, confirmed it by a solemn
oath.
“Now I am easy,” said she—“quite
easy—and may God bless you for it. In
the village here, there is a Mrs. Smith,
a good farmer's wife, who knows us well; 
she will see to have me decently buried,
and then has promised to sell all the little
I have for my girl, and to take care of her.
—And you'll never come near her more?”
“I did not promise that,” said Hervey.
The old woman again looked much disturbed.—
“Ah, good young gentleman!” said she,
“take my advice, it will be best for you
both. If you see her again, you will love
her, sir—you can't help it:—and, if she
sees you—poor thing, how innocently she

smiled, when she gave you the rose!—O,
sir, never come near her when I am gone!
It is too late for me now to get her out
of your way.—This night, I'm sure, will
be my last in this world—O, promise me
you will never come here again!”
“After the oath I have taken,” replied
Clarence, “that promise would be
unnecessary. Trust to my honour.”—
“Honour! O, that was the word the
gentleman said, that betrayed her poor
mother, and left her afterward to die!— 
O, sir! sir!—”
The violent emotion that she felt was
too much for her—she fell back exhausted
—never spoke more—and an hour afterward
she expired in the arms of her grandaughter.
The poor girl could not believe,
that she had breathed her last. She
made a sign to the surgeon, and to Clarence
Hervey, who stood beside her, to
be silent; and listened, fancying that the
corpse would breathe again. Then, she
kissed the cold lips, and the shrivelled
cheeks, and the eyelids, that were closed

for ever. She warmed the dead fingers
with her breath—she raised the heavy arm,
and, when it fell, she perceived there was
no hope: she threw herself upon her knees:
—“She is dead!” she exclaimed; “and
she has died without giving me her blessing.
She can never bless me again.”
They took her into the air, and Clarence
Hervey sprinkled water upon her face. It
was a fine night, and the fresh air soon
brought her to her senses. He then said,
that he would leave her to the care of the
surgeon, and ride to the village, in search
of that Mrs. Smith, who had promised to
be her friend.
“And so you are going away from me
too?” said she; and she burst into tears.
At the sight of these tears Clarence turned
away, and hurried from her. He sent
the woman from the village, but returned
no more that night.
Her simplicity, sensibility, and, perhaps
more than he was aware, her beauty, had
pleased and touched him extremely. The
idea of attaching a perfectly pure, disinterested,

unpractised heart, was delightful
to his imagination: the cultivation of her
understanding, he thought, would be an
easy and a pleasing task: all difficulties
vanished before his sanguine hopes.
“Sensibility,” said he to himself, “is
the parent of great talents, and great virtues; 
and evidently she possesses natural
feeling in an uncommon degree; it shall
be developed with skill, patience, and
delicacy; and I will deserve, before I
claim my reward.”
The next day he returned to the cottage,
accompanied by an elderly lady,
a Mrs. Ormond; the same lady, who afterward
to Marriott's prejudiced eyes
had appeared more like a duenna than
any thing else; but who, to this simple,
unsuspicious girl, seemed like what she
really was, a truly good natured benevolent
woman. She consented, most readily,
to put herself under the protection of Mrs.
Ormond, “provided Mrs. Smith would
give her leave.” There was no difficulty in
persuading Mrs. Smith, that it was for her

advantage. Mrs. Smith, who was a plain
farmer's wife, told all that she knew of
Rachel's history, but all that she knew
was little. She had heard only hints at
odd times from the old woman: these
agreed perfectly with what Mr. Hervey
had already heard.
“The old gentlewoman,” said Mrs.
Smith, “as I believe I should call her by
rights, has lived in the forest there,
where you found her, these many a year— 
she earned her subsistence by tending bees
and making rose-water—she was a good
soul, but very particular, especially about
her grandaughter, which, considering all
things, one cannot blame her for. She
often told me, she would never put Rachel
to no boarding school, which I approved,
seeing she had no fortune; and it is the
ruin of girls, to my mind, to be bred
above their means; as it was of her mother,
sir. Then she would not never
teach Rachel to write, for fear she should
take to scrawling nonsense of love-letters,
as her mother did before her. Now, sir,

this I approved too, for I don't much
mind about book-learning myself; and I
even thought it would have been as well
if the girl had not learnt to read; but
that she did learn, and was always fond
of, and I'm sure it was more plague
than use too to her grandmother, for she
was as particular about the books that the
girl was to read, as about all the rest. I'm
sure I saw her myself in as great a flurry
about a bit of old newspaper, that was
wrapped round a parcel of linen I took to
the house—as great a fuss, sir, as if the
whole world had been coming to pieces,
lest Rachel should have laid her eyes upon
it. ‘Now,’ observes I, ‘there's the use of
reading; I've carried the paper in my hand
this hour, and never thought of any harm,
and no harm could it do to me. Pray
what is there in it, after all?”
“Was Rachel present?—Did she see
this paper?”—interrupted Clarence.
“Lord! no sir, no; she was tending
the bees out of hearing, and the old lady
had it in the middle of the fire in a minute.

I'm only mentioning it, to show her particularities.
She went farther than all that,
sir; for she would never let the girl so much
as speak to a man—not a man ever went
within the doors of the house.”
“So she told me.”
“And she told you true enough. But
there, I thought, she was quite wrong; for,
seeing the girl must, some time or another,
speak to men, where was the use
of her not learning how, properly? Well,
sir, I won't tell you all the argufyings I
held on this point with her, but all to
no purpose; she was, I take it, on this
matter not quite rationable, and it was
but good natured to humour her. Lord!
madam,” continued Mrs. Smith, addressing
herself to Mrs. Ormond—“Lord!
madam, though it is a sin, to be remembering
so much the particularities of the
dead, I must say, there never was an old
lady, who had more scrupulosities than
the deceased. I verily thought, one day,
she'd have died, about the picture of a
man that Rachel lit upon by accident; as

if a picture had any sense to hurt a body.
Now, if it had been one of your naked
pictures, there might have been some decency
in her dislike to it; but it was no
such thing, but a very proper picture.
Lord! I really could not but laugh; but
I checked myself, when the poor old soul's
eyes filled with tears, which made me
know, she was thinking of her daughter
that was dead. When I thought on the
cause of her particularity about Rachel, I
could not laugh any more at her strangeness.
I promised the good lady, that day,
in case of her death, to take care of her
grandaughter; and I thought, in my own
mind, that, in time to come, if one of my
boys should take a fancy to her, I should
make no objections, because she was always
a good, modest behaved girl; and,
I'm sure, would make a good wife, though
too delicate for hard country work: but,
as it pleases God, to send you, madam,
and the good gentleman, to take the
charge of her off my hands, I am content
it should be so, and I will sell every thing

here for her honestly, and bring it to you,
madam, for poor Rachel.”
There was nothing that Rachel was
anxious to carry away with her but a
little bullfinch, of which she was very
fond. One, and but one, circumstance
about Rachel stopped the current of Clarence
Hervey's imagination, and this,
consequently, was excessively disagreeable
to him—her name—the name of Rachel
he could not endure, and he thought it so
unsuited to her, that he could scarcely believe
it belonged to her. He consequently
resolved to change it as soon as possible.
The first time that he beheld her, he was
struck with the idea, that she resembled
the description of Virginia in M. de St.
Pierre's celebrated Romance; and by this
name he always called her, from the hour
that she quitted her cottage.
Mrs. Ormond, the lady whom he had
engaged to take care of his Virginia, was
a widow, the mother of a gentleman, who
had been his tutor at college. Her son
died, and left her in such narrow circumstances,

that she was obliged to apply to
her friends for pecuniary assistance.
Mr. Hervey had been liberal in his contributions; 
from his childhood he had
known her worth, and her attachment to
him was blended with the most profound
respect; she was not a woman of superiour
abilities, or of much information; 
but her excellent temper and gentle disposition
won affection, though she had
not any talents to excite admiration. Mr.
Hervey had perfect confidence in her integrity,
he believed that she would exactly
comply with his directions, and he thought
that her want of literature and ingenuity
could easily be supplied by his own care
and instructions. He took a house for
her and his fair pupil at Windsor, and he
exacted a solemn promise, that she would
neither receive nor pay any visits. Virginia
was thus secluded from all intercourse with
the world: she saw no one but Mrs. Ormond,
Clarence Hervey, and Mr. Moreton,
an elderly clergyman, whom Mr.
Hervey engaged to attend every sunday,

to read prayers for them at home. Virginia
never expressed the slightest curiosity
to see any other persons, or any
thing beyond the walls of the garden
that belonged to the house in which she
lived; her present retirement was not
greater than that, to which she had long
been accustomed, and consequently she
did not feel her seclusion from the world
as any restraint: with the circumstances
that were altered in her situation, she
seemed neither to be dazzled nor charmed; 
the objects of convenience or luxury, that
were new to her, she looked upon with
indifference, but with any thing that reminded
her of her former way of life, and
of her grandmother's cottage, she was
delighted.
One day Mr. Hervey asked her, whether
she should like better to return to
that cottage, or to remain where she was?
He trembled for her answer—She innocently
replied—“I should like best to go
back to the cottage, if you would go with
me—but I would rather stay here with
you, than live there without you.”

Clarence was touched and flattered by
this artless answer, and for some time he
discovered every day fresh indications, as
he thought, of virtue and abilities in his
charming pupil. Her indifference to objects
of show and ornament appeared to
him an indisputable proof of her magnanimity,
and of the superiority of her unprejudiced
mind.—What a difference, thought
he, between this child of nature and the
frivolous sophisticated slaves of art!
To try and prove the simplicity of
her taste, and the purity of her mind, he
once presented to her a pair of diamond
earrings, and a moss rose bud, and asked
her to take whichever she liked the best.
—She eagerly snatched the rose, crying— 
“O! it puts me in mind of the cottage:
—how sweet it smells!”
She placed it in her bosom, and then
looking at the diamonds, said—“They
are pretty sparkling things—What are
they?—Of what use are they?—And
she looked with more curiosity and admiration
at the manner in which the earring

shut and opened, than at the diamonds.
Clarence was charmed with her. When
Mrs. Ormond told her, that these things
were to hang in her ears, she laughed, and
said—“How! how can I make them
hang?”
“Have you never observed, that I
wear earrings?” said Mrs. Ormond.
“Ay! but yours are not like these— 
And, let me look, I never saw how you
fastened them—Let me look?—O! you
have holes in your ears, but I have none
in mine.”
Mrs. Ormond told her, that holes
could easily be made in her ears, by running
a steel pin through them. She shrunk
back, defending her ear with one hand,
and pushing the diamonds from her with
the other, exclaiming—“O, no, no!—unless,” 
added she, changing her tone, and
turning to Clarence, “unless you wish it:
—if you bid me, I will.”
Clarence was scarcely master of himself
at this instant; and it was with the utmost
difficulty, that he could reply to her with

that dispassionate calmness, which became
his situation and hers.—And yet there
was more of ignorance and timidity, perhaps,
than of sound sense or philosophy,
in Virginia's indifference to diamonds; 
she did not consider them as ornaments,
that would confer distinction upon their
possessor, because she was ignorant of
the value affixed to them by society.
Isolated in the world, she had no excitements
to the love of finery, no competition,
no means of comparison, or opportunities
of display; diamonds were consequently
as useless to her, as guineas were
to Robinson Crusoe, on his desert island.
It could not justly be said, that he was
free from avarice, because he set no value
on the gold; or that she was free from
vanity, because she rejected the diamonds.
These reflections could not possibly have
escaped a man of Clarence Hervey's abilities; 
had he not been engaged in defence
of a favourite system of education, or if
his pupil had not been quite so handsome.
Virginia's absolute ignorance of the world

frequently gave an air of originality to her
most trivial observations, which made her
appear at once interesting and entertaining.
All her ideas of happiness were confined
to the life she had led during her
childhood; and as she had accidentally
lived in a beautiful situation in the New
Forest, she appeared to have an instinctive
taste for the beauties of nature, and for
what we call the picturesque. This taste
Mr. Hervey perceived, whenever he showed
her prints and drawings, and it was a fresh
source of delight and self-complacency to
him. All that was amiable or estimable
in Virginia had a double charm, from
the secret sense of his penetration, in having
discovered and appreciated the treasure.
The affections of this innocent girl
had no object but himself and Mrs. Ormond,
and they were strong, perhaps, in
proportion as they were concentrated.
The artless familiarity of her manner, and
her unsuspicious confidence, amounting
almost to credulity, had irresistible power
over Mr. Hervey's mind; he felt them as

appeals at once to his tenderness and his
generosity. He treated her with the utmost
delicacy, and his oath was never absent
from his mind: but he felt proudly
convinced, that if he had not been bound
by any such solemn engagement, no temptation
could have made him deceive and
betray confiding innocence.
Conscious that his views were honourable,
anticipating the generous pleasure
he should have in showing his superiority
to all mercenary considerations, and worldly
prejudices, in the choice of a wife, he indulged,
with a species of pride, his increasing
attachment to Virginia; but he was
not sensible of the rapid progress of his
passion, till he was suddenly awakened
by a few simple observations of Mrs. Ormond.
“This is Virginia's birthday—she tells
me she is seventeen to day.”
“Seventeen!—is she only seventeen?” cried
Clarence, with a mixture of surprise and
disappointment in his countenance—“Only
seventeen!—Why she is but a child still.”

“Quite a child,” said Mrs. Ormond,
“and so much the better.”
“So much the worse, I think,” said
Clarence. “But are you sure she's only
seventeen—she must be mistaken—she
must be eighteen at least.”
“God forbid!”
“God forbid!—Why Mrs. Ormond?”
“Because, you know, we have a year
more before us.”
“That may be a very satisfactory prospect
to you,” said Mr. Hervey, smiling.
“And to you, surely,” said Mrs. Ormond; 
“for I suppose, you would be
glad that your wife should, at least, know
the common things that every body
knows.”
“As to that,” said Clarence, “I should
be glad that my wife were ignorant of what
every body knows. Nothing is so tiresome
to a man of any taste or abilities, as what
every body knows. I am rather desirous to
have a wife who has an uncommon, than
a common understanding.”
“But you would choose, would not

you?”—said Mrs. Ormond, hesitating, with
an air of great deference—“that your
wife should know how to write?”
“To be sure,” replied Clarence, colouring
—“Does not Virginia know how
to write?”
“How should she?” said Mrs. Ormond
—“it is no fault of hers, poor
girl—She was never taught, you know:
it was her grandmother's notion, that she
should not learn to write, lest she should
write love letters.”
“But you promised that she should be
taught to write, and I trusted to you, Mrs.
Ormond.”
“She has been here only two months,
and all that time, I am sure, I have done
every thing in my power; but when a person
comes to be sixteen or seventeen, it is
up hill work.”
“I will teach her myself,” cried Clarence
—“I am sure she may be taught any
thing.”
“By you,” said Mrs. Ormond, smiling; 
“but not by me.”

“You have no doubts of her capacity,
surely?”
“I am no judge of capacity, especially
of the capacity of those I love, and I am
grown very fond of Virginia; she is a charming,
open hearted, simple, affectionate
creature. I rather think it is from indolence,
that she does not learn, and not
from want of abilities.”
“All indolence arises from want of excitement,” 
said Clarence—“If she had proper
motives, she would conquer her indolence.”
“Why, I dare say, if I were to tell her,
that she would never have a letter from
Mr. Hervey, till she is able to write an
answer, she would learn to write very expeditiously; 
but I thought, that would not
be a proper motive; because you forbid
me to tell her your future views. And
indeed it would be highly imprudent, on
your account, as well as hers, to give her
any hint of that kind; because you might
change your mind, before she's old enough
for you to think of her seriously, and then
you would not know what to do with her;

and after entertaining hopes of becoming
your wife, she would be miserable, I am
sure, with that affectionate tender heart
of hers, if you were to leave her. Now
that she knows nothing of the matter, we
are all safe, and as we should be.”
Though Clarence Hervey did not at
this time foresee any great probability of
his changing his mind, yet he felt the good
sense and justice of Mrs. Ormond's suggestions; 
and he was alarmed, to perceive
that his mind had been so intoxicated, as
to suffer such obvious reflections to escape
his attention. Mrs. Ormond, a woman
whom he had been accustomed to consider
as far his inferiour in capacity, he now
felt was superiour to him in prudence,
merely because she was undisturbed by
passion. He resolved to master his own
mind: to consider, that it was not a mistress,
but a wife, he wanted in Virginia:— 
that a wife without capacity, or without
literature, could never be a companion
suited to him; let her beauty or sensibility
be ever so exquisite and captivating. The
happines of his life and of hers were at stake,

and every motive of prudence and delicacy
called upon him to command his affections.
He was, however, still sanguine
in his expectations from Virginia's understanding,
and from his own power
of developing her capacity. He made
several attempts, with the greatest skill and
patience; and his fair pupil, though she did
not by any means equal his hopes, astonished
Mrs. Ormond, by her comparatively
rapid progress.
“I always believed, that you could
make her any thing you pleased,” said she.
“You are a tutor, who can work miracles
with Virginia.”
“I see no miracles,” replied Clarence; 
“I am conscious of no such power—I
should be sorry to possess any such influence,
until I am sure that it would be for
our mutual happiness.”
Mr. Hervey then conjured Mrs. Ormond,
by all her attachment to him and
to her pupil, never to give Virginia the
most distant idea, that he had any intentions
of making her his wife. She promised
to do all that was in her power, to keep

this secret, but she could not help observing,
that it had already been betrayed, as
plainly as looks could speak, by Mr. Hervey
himself. Clarence in vain endeavoured
to exculpate himself from this charge:
Mrs. Ormond brought to his recollection
so many instances of his indiscretion, that
it was substantiated even in his own judgment,
and he was amazed to find, that
all the time he had put so much constraint
upon his inclinations, he had, nevertheless,
so obviously betrayed them. His surprise,
however, was at this time unmixed with
any painful regret; he did not foresee the
probability that he should change his
mind, and notwithstanding Mrs. Ormond
assured him, that Virginia's sensibility
had increased, he was persuaded
that she was mistaken, and that his pupil's
heart and imagination were yet untouched.
The innocent openness, with which she
expressed her affection for him, confirmed
him, he said, in his opinion. To do him
justice, Clarence had none of the presumption,
which too often characterizes

men, who have been successful, as it is
called, with the fair sex. His acquaintance
with women had increased his persuasion,
that it is difficult to excite genuine
love in the female heart; and with respect
to himself, he was upon this subject
astonishingly incredulous. It was scarcely
possible to convince him, that he was beloved.
Mrs. Ormond, piqued upon this subject,
determined to ascertain more decisively
her pupil's sentiments.
“My dear,” said she, one day to Virginia,
who was feeding her bullfinch,
—“I do believe you are fonder of that
bird, than of any thing in the world— 
fonder of it, I am sure, than of me?”
“O! you cannot think so,” said Virginia,
with an affectionate smile.
“Well! fonder than you are of Mr.
Hervey, you will allow, at least?”
“No indeed!” cried she, eagerly:
“how can you think me so foolish, so
childish, so ungrateful, as to prefer a little
worthless bird to him—” (the bullfinch began

gan to sing so loud at this instant, that her
enthusiastic speech was stopped.)—“My
pretty bird,” said she, as it perched upon
her hand, “I love you very much, but
if Mr. Hervey were to ask it, to wish it,
I would open that window, and let you
fly; yes, and bid you fly away far from me
forever. Perhaps he does wish it?—Does
he?—Did he tell you so?” cried she, looking
earnestly in Mrs. Ormond's face, as
she moved toward the window.
Mrs. Ormond put her hand upon the
sash, as Virginia was going to throw it
up—
“Gently, gently, my love—Whither
is your imagination carrying you?”
“I thought something by your look,” said
Virginia, blushing.
“And I thought something, my dear
Virginia,” said Mrs. Ormond, smiling.
“What did you think?—What could
you think?”
“I cannot—I mean, I would rather
not at present tell you. But do not look

so grave, I will tell you some time or other,
if you cannot guess.”
Virginia was silent, and stood abashed.
“I am sure, my sweet girl,” said Mrs.
Ormond, “I do not mean, by any thing
I said, to confuse or blame you. It is
very natural, that you should be grateful
to Mr. Hervey, and that you should
admire, and, to a certain degree, love
him.”
Virginia looked up delighted, yet with
some hesitation in her manner.
“He is indeed,” said Mrs. Ormond,
“one of the first of human beings: such
even I have always thought him; and I
am sure I like you the better, my dear,” 
said she, kissing Virginia as she spoke; 
“only we must take care of it, or this
tenderness might go too far.”
“How so,” said Virginia, returning
her caresses with fondness; “can I love
you and Mr. Hervey too much?”
“Not me.”
“Nor him, I'm sure—he is so good, so
very good!—I am afraid that I do not love

him enough,” said she, sighing. “I love
him enough when he is absent, but not
when he is present. When he is near me,
I feel a sort of fear, mixed with my love.
I wish to please him very much, but I
should not quite like, that he should show
his love for me as you do—as you did
just now.”
“My dear, it would not be proper
that he should; you are quite right not
to wish it.”
“Am I? I was afraid that it was a
sign of my not liking him as much as I
ought.”
“Ah, my poor child!—You love him
full as much as you ought.”
“Do you think so? I am glad of it,” 
said Virginia, with a look of such confiding
simplicity, that her friend was touched
to the heart.
“I do think so, my love,” said Mrs.
Ormond, “and I hope I shall never be
sorry for it, nor you either. But it is not
proper, that we should say any more upon
this subject now. Where are your drawings?

Where is your writing? My dear,
we must get forward with these things as
fast as we can. That is the way to please
Mr. Hervey, I can tell you.”
Confirmed by this conversation in her
own opinion, Mrs. Ormond was satisfied.
From delicacy to her pupil, she did not
repeat all that had passed to Mr. Hervey,
resolving to wait till the proper moment.
“She is too young and too childish, for
him to think of marrying yet, for a year
or two,” thought she, “and it is better to
repress her sensibility, till her education
is more finished, by that time Mr. Hervey
will find out his mistake.”
In the mean time, she could not help
thinking that he was blind, for he continued
steady in his belief of Virginia's indifference.
To dissipate his own mind, and to give
time for the development of hers, he now,
according to his resolution, left his pupil
to the care of Mrs. Ormond, and mixed
as much as possible in gay and fashionable
company. It was at this period, that he

renewed his acquaintance with lady Delacour,
whom he had seen and admired before
he went abroad. He found that his
gallantry, on the famous day of the battle
between the turkies and pigs, was still
remembered with gratitude by her ladyship; 
she received him with marked courtesy,
and he soon became a constant
visitor at her house. Her wit entertained,
her eloquence charmed him, and he followed,
admired and gallanted her, without
scruple, for he considered her merely
as une franche coquette, who preferred
the glory of conquest to the security of
reputation. With such a woman he
thought he could amuse himself without
danger, and he every where appeared the
foremost in the public train of her ladyship's
admirers. He soon discovered, however,
that her talents were far superiour to
what are necessary for playing the part of a
fine lady; his visits became more and more
agreeable to him, and he was glad to feel,
that, by dividing his attention, his passion
for Virginia insensibly diminished, or as

he said to himself, became more reasonable.
In conversing with lady Delacour,
his faculties were always called into full
play; in talking to Virginia, his understanding
was passive; he perceived that a
large proportion of his intellectual powers
and of his knowledge was absolutely useless
to him in her company, and this did not
raise her either in his love or esteem. Her
simplicity and naïveté, however, sometimes
relieved him, after he had been fatigued
by the extravagant gayety and glare
of her ladyship's manners; and he reflected,
that the coquetry, which amused him
in an acquaintance, would be odious in a
wife: the perfect innocence of Virginia
promised security to his domestic happiness,
and he did not change his views, tho'
he was less eager for the period of their
accomplishment. “I cannot expect every
thing that is desirable,” said he, to himself:
“a more brilliant character than Virginia's
would excite my admiration, but
could not command my confidence.” It
was whilst his mind was in this situation,

that he became acquainted with Belinda.
At first, the idea of her having been educated
by the matchmaking Mrs. Stanhope
prejudiced him against her; but as he had
opportunities of observing her conduct,
this prepossession was conquered, and
when she had secured his esteem, he could
no longer resist her power over his heart.
In comparison with Belinda, Virginia appeared
to him but an insipid, though innocent
child; the one he found was his equal,
the other his inferiour; the one he saw
could be a companion, a friend to him for
life; the other would merely be his pupil,
or his plaything. Belinda had cultivated
tastes, an active understanding, a knowledge
of literature, the power and the habit
of conducting herself. Virginia was
ignorant and indolent, she had few ideas,
and no wish to extend her knowledge. She
was so entirely unacquainted with the
world, that it was absolutely impossible
she could conduct herself with that discretion,
which must be the combined result
of reasoning and experience. Mr.

Hervey had felt gratuitous confidence in
Virginia's innocence; but on Belinda's
prudence, which he had opportunities of
seeing tried, he gradually learned to feel a
different, and a higher species of reliance,
which is neither in our power to bestow
nor to refuse. The virtues of Virginia
sprang from sentiment; those of Belinda,
from reason.
Clarence, whilst he made all these comparisons,
became every day more wisely
and more fondly attached to Belinda; and,
at length, he became desirous to change
the nature of his connexion with Virginia,
and to appear to her only in the light of a
friend or a benefactor. He thought of
giving her two thousand pounds, and of
leaving her under the care of Mrs. Ormond,
till some suitable method of establishing
her in the world should occur.
Unfortunately, just at the time when Mr.
Hervey formed this plan, and before it
was communicated to Mrs. Ormond, difficulties
arose, which prevented him from
putting it into execution.

Whilst he had been engaged in the gay
world at lady Delacour's, his pupil had
necessarily been left much to the management
of Mrs. Ormond. This lady, with
the best possible intentions, had not that
reach of mind and variety of resource,
necessary to direct the exquisite sensibility
and ardent imagination of Virginia. The
solitude, in which she lived, added to the
difficulty of the task; without companions
to interest her social affections, without
real objects to occupy her senses and
understanding, Virginia's mind was either
perfectly indolent, or exalted by romantic
views and visionary ideas of happiness. A
she had never seen any thing of society, all
her notions were drawn from books; the
severe restrictions, which her grandmother
had early laid upon the choice of these,
seemed to have awakened her curiosity,
and to have increased her appetite for
books—it was insatiable. Reading, indeed,
was now almost her only pleasure; 
for Mrs. Ormond's conversation was seldom
entertaining, and Virginia had no longer

those occupations, which filled a portion
of her day at the cottage.
Mr. Hervey had cautioned Mrs. Ormond
against putting common novels
into her hands, but he made no objection
to romances: these, he thought, breathed
a spirit favourable to female virtue, exalted
the respect for chastity, and inspired
enthusiastic admiration of honour, generosity,
truth, and all the noble qualities,
which dignify human nature. Virginia
devoured these romances with the greatest
eagerness; and Mrs. Ormond, who found
her a prey to ennui, when her fancy was
not amused, indulged her taste; yet she
strongly suspected, that they contributed
to increase her passion for the only man
who could, in her imagination, represent
a hero.
One night Virginia found, in Mrs. Ormond's
room, a volume of St. Pierre's
Paul and Virginia. She knew, that her
own name had been taken from this romance; 
Mr. Hervey had her picture
painted in this character; and these circumstances

strongly excited her curiosity
to read the book. Mrs. Ormond could
not refuse to let her have it; for, though
it was not an ancient romance, it did not
exactly come under the description of a
common novel, and Mr. Hervey was not
at hand, to give his advice. Virginia sat
down instantly to her volume, and never
stirred from the spot, till she had nearly
finished it.
“What is it, that strikes your fancy so
much? What are you considering so
deeply, my love?” said Mrs. Ormond,
observing, that she seemed lost in thought.
“Let us see, my dear,” continued Mrs.
Ormond, offering to take the book, which
hung from her hand.—Virginia started
from her reverie, but held the volume fast.
—“Will not you let me read over your
shoulder, along with you?” said Mrs. Ormond.
“Won't you let me share your
pleasure?”
“It was not pleasure that I felt, I believe,” 
said Virginia. “I would rather,
you should not see just that particular

part that I was reading; and, yet, if you
desire it,” added she, resigning the book
reluctantly—
“What can make you so much afraid
of me, my sweet girl?”
“I am not afraid of you—but—of myself,” 
said Virginia, sighing.
Mrs. Ormond read the following passage:
“She thought of Paul's friendship,
more pure than the waters of the fountain,
stronger than the united palms, and
sweeter than the perfume of flowers; and
these images, in night and in solitude,
gave double force to the passion, which
she nourished in her heart. She suddenly
left the dangerous shades, and went to her
mother, to seek protection against herself.
She wished to reveal her distress to her; 
she pressed her hands, and the name of
Paul was on her lips; but the oppression
of her heart took away all utterance, and,
laying her hand upon her mother's bosom,
she only wept.”

“And am not I a mother to you, my
beloved Virginia?” said Mrs. Ormond.
“Though I cannot express my affection in
such charming language as this, yet, believe
me, no mother was ever fonder of a
child.”
Virginia threw her arms round Mrs.
Ormond, and laid her head upon her
friend's bosom, as if she wished to realize
the illusion, and to be the Virginia of
whom she had been reading.
“I know all you think, and all you feel:
I know,” whispered Mrs. Ormond, “the
name that is on your lips.”
“No, indeed, you do not; you cannot,” 
cried Virginia, suddenly raising
her head, and looking up in Mrs. Ormond's
face, with surprise and timidity— 
“how could you possibly know all my
thoughts and feelings? I never told them
to you; for, indeed, I have only confused
ideas, floating in my imagination, from
the books I have been reading. I do not
distinctly know my own feelings.”

“This is all very natural, and a proof
of your perfect innocence and simplicity,
my child. But, why did the passage you
were reading just now strike you so
much?”
“I was only considering,” said Virginia,
“whether it was the description of—love.”
“And your heart told you, that it was?”
“I don't know,” said she, sighing.
“But of this I am certain, that I had not
the name, which you were thinking of,
upon my lips.”
“Ah!” thought Mrs. Ormond, “she
has not forgotten how I checked her sensibility
some time ago. Poor girl! she is
become afraid of me, and I have taught
her to dissemble; but she betrays herself
every moment.”
“My dear,” said Mrs. Ormond, “you
need not fear me—I cannot blame you— 
In your situation, it is impossible, that
you could help loving Mr. Hervey.”
“Is it?”
“Yes; quite impossible. So do not
blame yourself for it.”

“No, I do not blame myself for that.
I only blame myself, for not loving him
enough, as I told you once before.”
“Yes, my dear; and the oftener you
tell me so, the more I am convinced of
your affection. It is one of the strongest
symptoms of love, that we are unconscious
of it's extent. We fancy, that we can
never do too much for the beloved object.”
“That is exactly what I feel about Mr.
Hervey.”
“That we can never love him enough.”
“Ah! that is precisely what I feel for
Mr. Hervey.”
“And what you ought—I mean, what
it is natural you should feel; and what he
will himself, I hope, indeed. I dare say,
some time or other wish, and be glad
that you should feel.”
“Some time or other!—Does not he
wish it now?”
“I—he—My dear, what a question is
that? And how shall I answer it? We
must judge of what he feels by what he
expresses: when he expresses love for you,

it will then be the time to show yours for
him.”
“He has always expressed love for me,
I think,” said Virginia—“always, till lately,” 
continued Virginia; “but lately he
has been away so much, and when he
comes home, he does not look so well
pleased; so that I was afraid he was
angry with me, and that he thought me
ungrateful.”
“O, my love, do not torment yourself
with these vain fears! And yet I know
that you cannot help it.”
“Since you are so kind, so very kind
so me,” said Virginia, “I will tell you all
my fears and doubts.—But it is late.
—There! the clock struck one.—I will
not keep you up.”
“I am not at all sleepy,” said the indulgent
Mrs. Ormond.
“Nor I,” said Virginia.
“Now, then,” said Mrs. Ormond,
“for these doubts and fears.”
“I was afraid that, perhaps, Mr. Hervey
would be angry if he knew that I

thought of any thing in the world but
him.”
“Of what else do you think?—Of
nothing else from morning till night, that
I can see.”
“Ah, then you do not see into my
mind. In the daytime I often think of
those heroes, those charming heroes, that
I read of in the books you have given
me.”
“To be sure you do.”
“And is not that wrong? Would not
Mr. Hervey be displeased if he knew it?”
“Why should he?”
“Because they are not quite like him.
I love some of them better than I do him,
and he might think that ungrateful.”
How naturally love inspires the idea of
jealousy, thought Mrs. Ormond. “My
dear,” said she, “you carry your ideas of
delicacy and gratitude to an extreme; 
but it is very natural you should: however,
you need not be afraid, Mr. Hervey
cannot be jealous of those charming

heroes, that never existed, though they are
not quite like him.”
“I am very glad that he would not
think me ungrateful—but if he knew that
I dream of them sometimes?”
“He would think you dreamed, as all
people do, of what they think of in the
daytime.”
“And he would not be angry? I am
very glad of it.—But I once saw a picture—”
“I know you did—well,” said Mrs.
Ormond, “and your grandmother was
frightened because it was the picture of a
man—hey? If she was not your grandmother,
I should say that she was a simpleton.
I assure you, Mr. Hervey is not
like her, if that is what you mean to ask.
He would not be angry at your having
seen fifty pictures.”
“I am glad of it—But I see it very
often in my dreams.”
“Well, if you had seen more pictures,
you would not see this so often. It was

the first you ever saw, and very naturally
you remember it. Mr. Hervey would not
be angry at that,” said Mrs. Ormond,
laughing.
“But sometimes, in my dreams, it
speaks to me.”
“And what does it say?”
“The same sort of things that those
heroes I read of say to their mistresses.”
“And do you never, in your dreams,
hear Mr. Hervey say these sort of things?”
“No.”
“And do you never see Mr. Hervey in
these dreams?”
“Sometimes; but he does not speak
to me; he does not look at me with the
same sort of tenderness, and he does not
throw himself at my feet.”
“No; because he has never done all
this in reality.”
“No; and I wonder how I come to
dream of such things.”
“So do I; but you have read and
thought of them, it is plain. Now go to
sleep, there's my good girl; that is the

best thing you can do at present—Go to
sleep.”
It was not long after this conversation,
that sir Philip Baddely and Mr. Rochfort
scaled the garden wall, to obtain a sight
of Clarence Hervey's mistress. Virginia
was astonished, terrified, and disgusted,
by their appearance; they seemed to her
a species of animals, for which she had no
name, and of which she had no prototype
in her imagination. That they were men
she saw; but they were clearly not Clarence
Herveys; they bore still less resemblance
to the courteous knights of
chivalry. Their language was so different
from any of the books she had read, and
any of the conversation she had heard, that
they were scarcely intelligible. After they
had forced themselves into her presence,
they did not scruple to address her in the
most unceremonious manner. Amongst
other rude things, they said, “Damme, my
pretty dear, you cannot love the man that
keeps you prisoner in this manner, hey?
Damme, you'd better come and live with

one of us. You can't love this tyrant of
a fellow.”
“He is not a tyrant—I do love him,
as much as I detest you,” cried Virginia,
shrinking from him with looks of horrour.
“Damme! Good actress! Put her on
the stage when he is tired of her.—So, you
won't come with us?—Good bye till we
see you again. You're right, my girl, to
be upon your good behaviour, may be
you may get him to marry you, child!”
Virginia, upon hearing this speech,
turned from the man who insulted her,
with a degree of haughty indignation, of
which her gentle nature had never before
appeared capable.
Mrs. Ormond hoped, that after the
alarm was over, the circumstance would
pass away from her pupil's mind; but,
on the contrary, it left the most forcible
impression. Virginia became silent and
melancholy, and whole hours were spent
in reverie. Mrs. Ormond imagined, that
notwithstanding Virginia's entire ignorance
of the world, she had acquired from books

suffiencient knowledge to be alarmed at the
idea of being taken for Clarence Hervey's
mistress. She touched upon this subject
with much delicacy, and the answers that
she received confirmed her opinion. Virginia
had been inspired by romances with
the most exalted notions of female delicacy
and honour; but from her perfect
ignorance, these were rather vague ideas
than principles of conduct.
“We shall see Mr. Hervey to morrow; 
he has written me word that he will come
from town, and spend the day with us.”
“I shall be ashamed to see him after
what has passed,” said Virginia.
“You have no cause for shame, my dear; 
Mr. Hervey will try to discover the persons who insulted you,
and he will punish them. They will never return
here, you need not fear that. He is willing
and able to protect you.”
“Yes; of that I am sure. But what
did that strange man mean, when he said—”
“What, my dear?”

“That, perhaps, Mr. Hervey would
marry me.”
Virginia pronounced these words with
difficulty. mrs Ormond was silent, for she was much embarrased. Virginia having conquered her first difficulty, seemed resolute to obtain an answer.
“You do not speak to me! Will you not tell me, dear Mrs Ormond,” said she, hanging upon her fondly, “what did he mean?”
“What he said, I suppose.”
“But he said, that if I behaved well, I might get Mr. Hervey to marry me. What did he mean by that?” said Virginia, in an accent of offended pride.
“He spoke very rudely and improperly, but it is not worth while to think of what he said or what he meant.”
“But, dear Mrs. Ormond, do not go away from me now, I never so much wished to speak to you in my whole life, and you turn away from me.”
“Well, my love, well, what would you say?”

“Tell me one thing, only one thing, and you will set my heart at ease. Does Mr. Hervey wish me to be his wife?”
“I cannot tell you that, my dearest Virginia. Time will show us. Perhaps his heart has not yet decided.”
“I wish it would decide,” said Virginia, sighing deeply; “and I wish that strange man had not told me any thing about the matter; it has made me very unhappy.”
She covered her eyes with her hand, but the tears trickled between her fingers, and rolled fast down her arm. Mrs Ormond, quite overcome by the sight of her distress, was no longer able to keep the secret, with which she had been entrusted by Clarence Hervey—“And after all,” thought she, “Virginia will hear it from himself soon. I shall only spare her some unnecessary pain; it is cruel to see her thus, and to keep her in suspence. besides, her weakness might be her ruin, in his opinion, it it were to extinguish all her energy, and deprive her of the very power of pleasing.How wan she looks,

and how heavy are those sleepless eyes! She is not, indeed, in a condition to meet him, when he comes to us to morrow: if she had some hopes, she would revive, and appear with her natural ease and grace.”
“My sweet child,” said Mrs. Ormond, “I cannot bear to see you so melancholy; consider, Mr.Hervey will be with us to morrow, and it will give him a great deal of pain to see you so.”
“Will it? Then I will try to be very gay.”
Mrs Ormond was so delighted to see Virginia smile, that she could not forbear adding, “The strange man was not wrong in every thing he said; you will, one of these days, be Mr. Hervey's wife.”
“That I am sure,” said Virginia, bursting again into tears—“that I am sure I do not wish, unless he does.”
He does, he does, my dear—do not let this delicacy of yours, which has been wound up too high, make you miserable. He thought of you, he loved you long and long ago.”

“He is very good, too good,” said
Virginia, sobbing.
“Nay, what is more—for I can keep
nothing from you—he has been educating
you all this time on purpose for his wife,
and he only waits till your education is
finished, and till he is sure that you feel
no repugnance for him.”
“I should be very ungrateful if I felt
any repugnance for him,” said Virginia; 
“I feel none.”
“O, that you need not assure me,” 
said Mrs. Ormond.
“But I do not wish to marry him—I
do not wish to marry.”
“You are a modest girl to say so, if
you did; and this modesty will make you
ten times more amiable, especially in Mr.
Hervey's eyes. Heaven forbid that I
should lessen it!”
The next morning Virginia, who always
slept in the same room with Mrs. Ormond,
wakened her, by crying out in her
sleep with a voice of terrour, “O, save

him!—save Mr. Hervey!—Mr. Hervey!
—forgive me! forgive me!”—
Mrs. Ormond drew back the curtain,
and saw Virginia lying fast asleep; her
beautiful face convulsed with agony.
“He's dead!—Mr. Hervey!”—cried
she, in a voice of exquisite distress: then
starting up, and stretching out her arms,
she uttered a piercing cry, and awoke.
“My love, you have been dreaming
frightfully,” said Mrs. Ormond.
“Is Mr. Hervey alive? Where is he?
Has he forgiven me? Is it all a dream?” 
cried Virginia, looking round fearfully.
“All a dream, my dear!” said Mrs.
Ormond, taking her hand.
“I am very, very glad of it!—Let
me breathe.—It was, indeed, a frightful
dream!”
“Your hand still trembles,” said Mrs.
Ormond; “let me put back this hair
from your poor face, and you will grow
cool, and forget this foolish dream.”
“No; I must tell it you. I ought to
tell it you. But it was all so confused, I

can recollect only some parts of it. First,
I remember that I thought I was not myself,
but the Virginia that we were reading
of the other night; and I was somewhere
in the Isle of France. I thought
the place was something like the forest
where my grandmother's cottage used to
be, only there were high mountains and
rocks, and cocoa-trees and plantains.”
“Such as you saw in the prints of that
book?”
“Yes; only beautiful, beautiful beyond
description! And it was moonlight,
brighter and clearer than any moonlight
I ever before had seen; and the air was
fresh, yet perfumed; and I was seated under
the shade of a plane-tree, beside Virginia's
fountain.”
“Just as you are in your picture?”
“Yes; but Paul was seated beside
me.”
“Paul!” said Mrs. Ormond, smiling; 
“that is Mr. Hervey.”
“No; not Mr. Hervey's figure, though
it spoke with his voice—this is what I

thought that I must tell you. It was another
figure: it seemed a real living person:
it knelt at my feet, and spoke to me
so kindly, so tenderly; and just as it was
going to kiss my hand, Mr. Hervey appeared,
and I started terribly, for I was
afraid he would be displeased, and that
he would think me ungrateful; and he
was displeased, and he called me ungrateful
Virginia, and frowned; and then I
gave him my hand, and then every thing
changed, I do not know how suddenly,
and I was in a place like the great print
of the cathedral, which Mr. Hervey showed
me; and there were crowds of people—I
was almost stifled. You pulled me on, as
I remember; and Mr. Moreton was there,
standing upon some steps, by what you
called the altar; and then we knelt down
before him, and Mr. Hervey was putting
a ring on my finger; but there came suddenly
from the crowd that strange man,
who was here the other day, and he
dragged me along with him, I don't know
how or where, swiftly down precipices,

whilst I struggled, and at last fell. Then
all changed again, and I was in a magnificent
field, covered with cloth of gold, and
there were beautiful ladies seated under
canopies; and I thought it was a tournament,
such as I have read of, only more
splendid; and two knights, clad in complete
armour, and mounted on fiery steeds,
were engaged in single combat, and they
fought furiously, and I thought they were
fighting for me. One of the knights wore
black plumes in his helmet, and the other
white; and, as he was passing by me, the
vizor of the knight of the white plumes
was let down, and I saw it was—”
“Clarence Hervey?” said Mrs. Ormond.
“No; still the same figure that knelt
to me; and I wished him to be victorious.
And he was victorious. And he unhorsed
his adversary, and stood over him with his
drawn sword; and then I saw that the
knight in the black plumes was Mr. Hervey,
and I ran to save him, but I could
not. I saw him weltering in his blood,

and I heard him say, ‘Perfidious, ungrateful
Virginia! you are the cause of
my death!’—and I screamed, I believe,
and that wakened me.”
“Well, it is only a dream, my love,” 
said Mrs. Ormond; “Mr. Hervey is safe; 
get up, and dress yourself, and you will
soon see him.”
“But was it not wrong and ungrateful,
to wish that the knight in the white
plumes should be victorious?”
“Your poor little head is full of nothing
but these romances, and love for Mr.
Hervey. It is your love for him, that
makes you fear that he will be jealous.
But he is not so simple as you are. He
will forgive you for wishing that the
knight in the white plumes should be
victorious, especially as you did not know
that the other knight was Mr. Hervey.
Come, my love, dress yourself, and think
no more of these foolish dreams, and all
will go well.”