

The kettle was on the fire, tea things
set, every thing prepared for her guest,
by the hospitable hostess, who, thinking
the gentleman would take tea to
his breakfast, had sent off a gossoon by
the first light to Clonbrony, for an
ounce of tea, a quarter of sugar, and a
loaf of white bread; and there was on
the little table good cream, milk, butter,
eggs—all the promise of an excellent
breakfast. It was a fresh morning, and
there was a pleasant fire on the hearth
neatly swept up. The old woman was
sitting in her chimney corner, behind a
little skreen of white-washed wall, built
out into the room, for the purpose of
keeping those who sat at the fire from
the blast of the door. There was a loop-hole
in this wall, to let the light in, just

at the height of a person's head, who was
sitting near the chimney. The rays of
the morning sun now came through it,
shining across the face of the old woman,
as she sat knitting; Lord Colambre
thought he had seldom seen a more
agreeable countenance, intelligent eyes,
benevolent smile, a natural expression
of cheerfulness, subdued by age and
misfortune.
“A good-morrow to you, kindly sir,
and I hope you got the night well?—A
fine day for us this Sunday morning; 
my Grace is gone to early prayers, so
your honour will be content with an
old woman to make your breakfast.— 
O, let me put in plenty, or it will
never be good; and if your honour
takes stirabout, an old hand will engage
to make that to your liking any
way, for by great happiness we have
what will just answer for you, of the
nicest meal the miller made my Grace
a compliment of, last time she went to
the mill.

Lord Colambre observed, that this
miller had good taste; and his lordship
paid some compliment to Grace's
beauty, which the old woman received
with a smile, but turned off the conversation.
—“Then,” said she, looking
out of the window, “is not that there
a nice little garden the boy dug for her
and me, at his breakfast and dinner
hours? Ah! he's a good boy, and a
good warrant to work; and the good
son desarves the good wife, and it's he
that will make the good husband; and
with my goodwill he, and no other,
shall get her, and with her goodwill the
same; and I bid 'em keep up their
heart, and hope the best, for there's no
use in fearing the worst till it comes.”
Lord Colambre wished very much to
know the worst.
“If you would not think a stranger
impertinent for asking,” said he; “and
if it would not be painful to you to
explain.”
“O, impertinent, your honour! it's

very kind—and sure, none's a stranger
to one's heart, that feels for one. And
for myself, I can talk of my troubles
without thinking of them. So, 'Ill tell
you all—if the worst comes to the
worst—all that is, is, that we must
quit, and give up this little snug place
and house, and farm and all, to the
agent—which would be hard on us, and
me a widow, when my husband did all
that is done to the land; and if your
honour was a judge, you could see, if
you stepped out, there has been a deal
done, and built the house, and all—but
it plased Heaven to take him. Well,
he was too good for this world, and I'm
satisfied—I'm not saying a word again'
that—I trust we shall meet in Heaven,
and be happy surely.—And, meantime,
here's my boy, that will make me as
happy as ever widow was on Earth—if
the agent will let him. And I can't
think the agent, though they that know
him best call him old Nick, would be
so wicked to take from us that which

he never gave us. The good lord himself
granted us the lase; the life's dropped,
and the years is out; but we had
a promise of renewal in writing from
the landlord.—God bless him! if he
was not away, he'd be a good gentleman,
and we'd be happy and safe.”
“But if you have a promise in writing
of a renewal, surely, you are safe,
whether your landlord is absent or present.”
“Ah, no! that makes a great differ,
when there's no eye or hand over the
agent. I would not wish to speak or
think ill of him, or any man; but was
he an angel, he could not know to do
the tenantry justice, the way he is
living always in Dublin, and coming
down to the country only the receiving
days, to make a sweep among us, and
gather up the rents in a hurry, and
he in such haste back to town—can
just stay to count over our money,
and give the receipts. Happy for us,
if we get that same!—but can't expect

he should have time to see or hear us,
or mind our improvements, any more than
listen to our complaints! O! there's
great excuse for the gentleman, if that
was any comfort for us,” added she,
smiling.
“But, if he does not live amongst
you himself, has not he some underagent,
who lives in the country?” said
lord Colambre.
“He has so.”
“And he should know your concerns:
does he mind them?”
“He should know—he should know
better: but as to minding our concerns,
your honour knows,” continued she,
smiling again, “every one in this
world must mind their own concerns; 
and it would be a good world, if it was
even so. There's a great deal in all
things, that don't appear at first sight.
Mr. Dennis wanted Grace for a wife for
his bailiff, but she would not have him; 
and Mr. Dennis was very sweet to her
himself—but Grace is rather high with

him as proper, and he has a grudge
again us ever since. Yet, indeed,
there,” added she, after another pause,
“as you say, I think we are safe; for
we have that memorandum in writing,
with a pencil, given under his own
hand, on the back of the lase, to me,
by the same token when my good lord
had his foot on the step of the coach,
going away; and I'll never forget the
smile of her that got that good turn done
for me, miss Grace. And just when
she was going to England and London,
and young as she was, to have the thought
to stop and turn to the likes of me!
O, then, if you could see her, and
know her as I did! That was the comforting
angel upon Earth—look and
voice, and heart and all! O, that she
was here present, this minute!—But
did you scald yourself?” said the widow
to lord Colambre.—“Sure, you must
have scalded yourself; for you poured
the kettle straight over your hand, and
it boiling! O deear! to think of so

young a gentleman's hand shaking so
like my own.”
Luckily, to prevent her pursuing her
observations from the hand to the face,
which might have betrayed more than
Lord Colambre wished she should
know, her own Grace came in at this
instant—
“There, it's for you safe, mother
dear—the lase!” said Grace, throwing
a packet into her lap. The old woman
lifted up her hands to Heaven with the
lease between them—“Thanks be to
Heaven!” Grace passed on, and sunk
down on the first seat she could reach.
Her face flushed, and, looking much
fatigued, she loosened the strings of her
bonnet and cloak—“Then, I'm tired!” 
but, recollecting herself, she rose, and
curtsied to the gentleman.
“What tired ye, dear?”
“Why, after prayers, we had to go— 
for the agent was not at prayers, nor at
home for us, when we called—we had
to go all the way up to the castle; and

there, by great good luck, we found
Mr. Nick Garraghty himself, come
from Dublin, and the lase in his hands; 
and he sealed it up that way, and
handed it to me very civil. I never
saw him so good—though he offered
me a glass of spirits, which was not
manners to a decent young woman, in a
morning—as Brian noticed after. Brian
would not take any either, nor never
does. We met Mr. Dennis and the
driver coming home; and he says, the
rent must be paid to morrow, or, instead
of renewing, he'll seize and sell
all. Mother dear, I would have dropped
with the walk, but for Brian's arm.” 
—“It's a wonder, dear, what makes
you so weak, that used to be so
strong.”—“But if we can sell the cow
for any thing at all to Mr. Dennis, since
his eye is set upon her, better let him
have her, mother dear; and that and
my yarn, which Mrs. Garraghty says
she'll allow me for, will make up the
rent—and Brian need not talk of America.

—But it must be in golden guineas,
the agent will take the rent no other
way; and you won't get a guinea for
less than five shillings. Well, even so,
it's easy selling my new gown, to one
that covets it, and that will give me
in exchange the price of the gold; 
or suppose that would not do, add this
cloak, it's handsome, and I know a
friend would be glad to take it, and I'd
part it as ready as look at it—Any
thing at all, sure, rather than that he
should be forced to talk of emigrating; 
or, O, worse again, listing for the
bounty—to save us from the cant or
the jail, by going to the hospital, or his
grave, may be—O mother!”
“O, child! This is what makes
you weak, fretting. Don't be that way.
Sure here's the lase, and that's good
comfort;—and the soldiers will be
gone out of Clonbrony to morrow, and
then that's off your mind. And as to
America, it's only talk.—I won't let
him, he's dutiful; and would sooner

sell my dresser, and down to my bed,
dear, then see you sell any thing of
yours, love.—Promise me you won't.
Why didn't Brian come home all the
way with you, Grace?”
“He would have seen me home,” 
said Grace, “only that he went up a
piece of the mountain for some stones or
ore, for the gentleman,—for he had the
manners to think of him this morning,
though shame for me, I had not, when I
come in, or I would not have told you
all this, and he himself by. See,
there he is, mother.”
Brian came in very hot, out of breath,
with his hat full of stones. “Good morrow
to your honour. I was in bed last night; 
and sorry they did not call me up to be
of sarvice. Larry was telling us, this
morning, your honour's from Wales,
and looking for mines in Ireland, and
I heard talk that there was one on our
mountain—may be, you'd be curous to
see; and so, I brought the best I could,
but I'm no judge.”

Nor I neither (thought lord Colambre)
but he thanked the young man,
and determined to avail himself of
Larry's misconception or false report; 
examined the stones very gravely,
and said, “This promises well. Lapis
caliminaris, schist, plumb-pudding
stone, rhomboidal, crystal, blend,
garrawachy,” and all the strange names
he could think of, jumbling them together
at a venture.
“The lase!—Is it!” cried the young
man, with joy sparkling in his eyes,
as his mother held up the packet.—
“Then all's safe! and he's an honest
man, and shame on me, that could
suspect he meant us wrong.—Lend me
the papers.”
He cracked the seals, and, taking off
the cover—“It's the lase, sure enough.
Shame on me!—But stay, where's the
memorandum?”
“It's there, sure,” said his mother,
“where my lord's pencil writ it.—I
don't read.—Grace, dear, look.”

The young man put it into her hands,
and stood without power to utter a
syllable.
“It's not here! It's gone!—no sign
of it.”
“Gracious Heaven! that can't be,” 
said the old woman, putting on her
spectacles; “let me see,—I remember
the very spot.”
“It's taken away—it's rubbed clean
out!—O, wasn't I fool?—But, who
could have thought he'd be the villain?” 
The young man seemed neither
to see nor hear; but to be absorbed in
thought.
Grace, with her eyes fixed upon him,
grew as pale as death—“He'll go—he's
gone.”
“She's gone!” cried lord Colambre,
and the mother just caught her in her
arms as she was falling.
“The chaise is ready, plase your
honour,” said Larry, coming into
the room.—--“Death, what's here?— 
air—she's coming to,” said the young

man—“Take a drop of water, my own
Grace.”
“Young man, I promise you”—cried
lord Colambre, (speaking in the tone of a
master) striking the young man's shoulder
who was kneeling at Grace's feet.— 
But recollecting and restraining himself,
he added, in a quiet voice;—“I
promise you, I shall never forget the
hospitality I have received in this house,
and I am sorry to be obliged to leave
you in distress.”
These words uttered with difficulty; 
he hurried out of the house, and into
his carriage. “Go back, to them,” 
said he, to the postillion; “go back,
and ask whether, if I should stay a day
or two longer in this country, they
would let me return at night and lodge
with them.—And here, man, stay,
take this,” putting money into his
hands, “for the good woman of the
house.”
The postillion went in, and returned.
“She won't at all—I knew she would
not.”

“Well, I am obliged to her for the
night's lodging she did give me; I
have no right to expect more.”
“What is it?—Sure she bid me
tell you,—‘and welcome, to the
lodging;’—‘for,’ said she, ‘he is a
kind-hearted gentleman;’ but here's
the money; it's that I was telling you
she would not have at all.”
“Thank you.—Now my good
friend, Larry, drive me to Clonbrony,
and do not say another word, for I'm
not in a talking humour.”
Larry nodded; mounted, and drove to
Clonbrony. Clonbrony was now a melancholy
scene. The houses, which had
been built in a better style of architecture
than usual, were in a ruinous
condition; the dashing was off the walls,
no glass in the windows, and many of
the roofs without slates.—For the stillness
of the place lord Colambre in
some measure accounted, by considering
that it was Sunday; therefore, of
course, all the shops were shut up, and

all the people at prayers. He alighted
at the inn, which completely answered
Larry's representation of it.—Nobody
to be seen, but a drunken waiter, who,
as well as he could articulate, informed
lord Colambre, that “his mistress was
in her bed since Thursday was a-week; 
the hostler at the wash-woman's, and the
cook at second prayers.”
Lord Colambre walked to the church,
but the church gate was locked and
broken—a calf, two pigs, and an ass,
in the churchyard; and several boys
(with more of skin apparent than clothes)
were playing at hustlecap upon a
tomb-stone, which upon nearer observation
he saw was the monument of
his own family. One of the boys came
to the gate, and told lord Colambre
“There was no use in going into the
church, becaase there was no church
there; nor had not been this twelve-month; 
becaase, there was no curate; 
and the parson was away always, since

the lord was at home—that is, was not
at home—he, nor the family.”
Lord Clonbrony returned to the inn,
where, after waiting a considerable time,
he gave up the point, he could not
get any dinner, and in the evening he
walked out again into the town. He
found several ale-houses however open,
which were full of people; all of them
as busy and as noisy as possible.— 
He observed, that the interest was
created by an advertisement of several
farms on the Clonbrony estate to
be set by Nicholas Garraghty, Esq.,
he could not help smiling at his being
witness incogniot to various schemes
for outwitting the agents and defrauding
the landlord; but on a sudden the
scene was changed; a boy ran in, crying
out, that “St. Dennis was riding down
the hill into the town; and, if you
would not have the license,” said the
boy, “take care of yourself.”
“If you wouldn't have the license,”

Lord Colambre perceived, by what followed,
meant; “If you have not a license.”
Brannagan immediately snatched
an untasted glass of whiskey from a
customer's lips, (who cried, murder!)
gave it and the bottle he held in his
hand to his wife, who swallowed the
spirits, and ran away with the bottle
and glass into some back hole; whilst
the bye-standers laughed, saying,
“Well thought of, Peggy!”
“Clear out all of you at the back door,
for the love of Heaven, if you wouldn't
be the ruin of me,” said the man of the
house, setting a ladder to a corner of
the shop.—“Phil, hoist me up the keg
to the loft,” added he, running up the
ladder; and “one of yees step up street,
and give Rose M'Givney notice, for
she's selling too.”
The keg was hoisted up, the ladder
removed; the shop cleared of all the
customers; the shutters shut; the door
barred; the counter cleaned. “Lift your
stones, sir, if you plase,” said the

wife, as she rubbed the counter, and
“say nothing of what you seen at
all; but that you're a stranger and a
traveller seeking a lodging, if you're
questioned, or waiting to see Mr.
Dennis.—There's no smell of whiskey
in it now, is there sir?”
Lord Colambre could not flatter her
so far as to say this, he could only hope
no one would perceive it.
“O, and if he would, the smell of
whiskey was nothing,” as the wife
affirmed, “for it was every where in
nature, and no proof again' any one,
good or bad.”
“Now St. Dennis may come when
he will, or old Nick himself.” So
she tied up a blue handkerchief over
her head, and had the tooth ache,
“very bad.”
Lord Colambre turned to look for the
man of the house.
“He's safe in bed,” said the wife.
“In bed! When?”
“Whilst you turned your head,

while I was tying the handkerchief
over my face.—Within the room, look
he is snug.”
And there he was in bed certainly,
and his clothes on the chest.
A knock, a loud knock at the door.
“St. Dennis himself!—Stay, till I
unbar the door,” said the woman, and
making a great difficulty, she let him
in, groaning, and saying,
“We was all done up for the night,
plase your honour, and myself with the
tooth ache, very bad—And the lodger,
that's going to take an egg only, before
he'd go into his bed.—My man's in it,
and asleep long ago.”
With a magisterial air, though with a
look of blank disappointment, Mr.
Dennis Garraghty walked on, looked
into the room, saw the good man of
the house asleep, heard him snore, and
then returning, asked lord Colambre
“who he was, and what brought him
there?”
Our hero said, he was from England,

and a traveller; and now, bolder
grown as a geologist, he talked of his specimens,
and his hopes of finding a mine
in the neighbouring mountains; then
adopting, as well as he could, the servile
tone and abject manner in which he
found Mr. Dennis was to be addressed,
“he hoped he might get encouragement
from the gentleman at the head of the
estate.”
“To bore, is it?—Well, don't bore
me about it. I can't give you any
answer now, my good friend, I'm engaged.”
Out he strutted.—“Stick to him
up the town, if you have a mind to get
your answer,” whispered the woman.
Lord Colambre followed, for he wished
to see the end of this scene.
“Well, sir, what are you following,
and sticking to me, like my shadow
for?” said Mr. Dennis, turning suddenly
upon lord Colambre.
His lordship bowed low. “Waiting
for my answer, sir, when you are at

leisure. Or, may I call upon you to
morrow?”
“You seem to be a civil kind of
fellow; but as to boring, I don't
know—if you undertake it at your own
expense. I dare say there may be
minerals in the ground. Well, you
may call at the castle to morrow, and
when my brother has done with the
tenantry, I'll speak to him for you,
and we'll consult together, and see
what we think.—It's too late to night.
In Ireland, nobody speaks to a gentleman
about business after dinner—your
servant, sir; any body can show you
the way to the castle in the morning.” 
And pushing by his lordship, he called
to a man on the other side of the street,
who had obviously been waiting for
him; he went under a gateway with
this man, and gave him a bag of guineas.
He then called for his horse, which was
brought to him by a man, whom
Colambre had heard declaring, that
he would bid for the land that was

advertized; whilst another, who had the
same intentions, most respectfully held
St. Dennis's stirrup, whilst he mounted
without thanking either of these
men. St. Dennis clapped spurs to his
steed, and rode away. No thanks indeed
were deserved, for, the moment he
was out of hearing, both cursed him
after the manner of their country.
“Bad luck go with you, then!— 
And may you break your neck before
you get home! If it was not for the
lase I'm to get, and that's paid for.”
Lord Clonbrony followed the crowd
into a publick house, where a new
scene presented itsef this view.
The man to whom St. Dennis gave
the bag of gold was now selling this
very gold to the tenants, who were to
pay their rent next day at the castle.
The agent would take nothing but
gold. The same guineas were bought
and sold several times over, to the great
profit of the agent and loss of the poor
tenants; for, as the rents were paid, the

guineas were resold to another set; and
the remittances made through bankers
to the landlord, who, as the poor man
who explained the transaction to lord
Colambre expressed it, “gained nothing
by the business, bad or good, but the
illwill of the tenantry.”
The higgling for the price of the
gold; the time lost in disputing about
the goodness of the notes, among some
poor tenants, who could not read or
write, and who were at the mercy of
the man with the bag in his hand; the
vexation, the useless harrassing of all,
who were obliged to submit ultimately— 
Lord Colambre saw, and all this time
he endured the smell of tobacco and
whiskey, and of the sound of various
brogues, the din of men wrangling,
brawling, threatening, whining, drawling,
cajoling, cursing, and every variety
of wretchedness.
“And, is this my father's town of
Clonbrony?” thought lord Colambre.
“Is this Ireland?—No, it is not Ireland.

Let me not, like most of those, who
forsake their native country, traduce it.
Let me not, even to my own mind,
commit the injustice of taking a speck
for the whole. What I have just seen,
is the picture only of that to which an
Irish estate, and Irish tenantry, may be
degraded in the absence of those, whose
duty and interest it is, to reside in
Ireland, to uphold justice by example
and authority; but who, neglecting this
duty, commit power to bad hands and
bad hearts; abandon their tenantry to
oppression, and their property to ruin.”
It was now fine moonlight, and lord
Colambre met with a boy, who said, he
could show him a short way across the
fields to the widow O'Neil's cottage.