

As lord Colambre was returning home,
he was overtaken by sir Terence
O'Fay—
“Well, my lord,” cried sir Terence,
out of breath, “you have led me a
pretty dance all over the town—here's a
letter somewhere down in my safe
pocket for you, which has cost me
trouble enough. Phoo! where is it
now—it's from miss Nugent,” said he,
holding up the letter. The direction to
Grosvenor square, London, had been
scratched out, and it had been redirected
by sir Terence to the lord viscount
Colambre, at sir James Brooke's,
bart. Brookwood, Huntingdonshire, or
elsewhere, with speed. But the
more haste the worse speed; for away
it went to Brookwood, Huntingdonshire,

where I knew, if any where,
you was to be found; but, as fate and
the post would have it, there the letter
went coursing after you, while you
were running round, and back and forwards,
and every where, I understand,
to Todrington and Wrestham, and where
not, through all them English places,
where there's no cross-post; so I took
it for granted that it found it's way to
the dead-letter office, or was sticking
up across a pane in the d&wblank;d post-master's
window at Huntingdon, for the
whole town to see, and it a love-letter,
and some puppy to claim it, under false
pretence; and you all the time without
it, and it might breed a coolness betwixt
you and miss Nugent.”
“But, my dear sir Terence, give me
the letter now you have me.”
“O! my dear lord, if you knew
what a race I have had, missing you
here by five minutes, and there by five
seconds—but I have you at last, and
you have it—and I'm paid this minute

for all I liquidated of my substance, by
the pleasure I have in seeing you crack
the seal and read it. But take care you
don't tumble over the orange woman— 
orange barrows are a great nuisance,
when one's studying a letter in the
streets of London, or the metropolis.— 
But never heed; stick to my arm, and
I'll guide you like a blind man, safe
through the thick of them.”
Miss Nugent's letter, which lord Colambre
read in spite of the jostling of
passengers, and the incessant talking of
sir Terence, was as follows:
“Let me not be the cause of
banishing you from your home and
your country, where you would do
so much good, and make so many
happy. Let me not be the cause of
your breaking your promise to your
mother; of your disappointing my
dear aunt so cruelly, who has complied
with all our wishes, and who
sacrifices, to oblige us, her favourite

tastes. How could she ever be happy
in Ireland?—How could Clonbrony
castle be a home to her, without her
son? If you take away all she had
of amusement and pleasure, as it is
called, are not you bound to give her
in their stead that domestic happiness,
which she can enjoy only with
you and by your means? If, instead
of living with her, you go into the
army, she will be in daily, nightly
anxiety and alarm about you; and
her son will, instead of being a comfort,
be a source of torment to her.
“I will hope that you will do now,
as you have always hitherto done on
every occasion where I have seen you
act, what is right, and just, and kind.
Come here on the day you promised
my aunt, you would; before that
time I shall be in Cambridgeshire,
with my friend lady Berryl; she is so
good as to come to Buxton for me— 
I shall remain with her, instead of
returning to Ireland. I have explained

my reasons to my dear aunt ...
could I have any concealment from
her, to whom, from my earliest childhood,
I owe every thing that kindness
and affection could give. She is
satisfied—she consents to my living
henceforward with lady Berryl. Let
me have the pleasure of seeing, by
your conduct, that you approve of
mine.
“Your affectionate cousin,
“and friend,
“Grace Nugent.”
This letter, as may be imagined by
those who, like him, are capable of
feeling honourable and generous conduct,
gave our hero exquisite pleasure.
Poor, good-natured sir Terence O'Fay
enjoyed his lordship's delight; and forgot
himself so completely, that he never
even inquired whether lord Colambre
had thought of an affair on which he
had spoken to him some time before,
and which materially concerned sir Terence's

interest. The next morning,
when the carriage was at the door, and
sir Terence was just taking leave of his
friend lord Clonbrony, and actually in
tears, wishing them all manner of
happiness, though he said there was
none left now in London, or the wide
world even, for him—lord Colambre
went up to him, and said, “Sir Terence,
you have never inquired whether
I have done your business?”
“Oh! my dear, I'm not thinking of
that now—time enough by the post— 
I can write after you, but my thoughts
won't turn for me to business now.
No matter.”
“Your business is done,” replied
lord Colambre.
“Then I wonder how you could
think of it, with all you had upon your
mind and heart. When any thing's
upon my heart, good morning to my
head, it's not worth a lemon. Good
bye to you, and thank you kindly, and
all happiness attend you.”

“Good bye to you, sir Terence
O'Fay,” said lord Clonbrony; “and
since it's so ordered, I must live without
you.”
“Oh! you'll live better without me,
my lord; I am not a good liver I know,
nor the best of all companions for a
nobleman, young or old; and now
you'll be rich, and not put to your
shifts and your wits, what would I have
to do for you?—Sir Terence O'Faye
you know, was only the poor nobleman's
friend, and you'll never want to call
upon him again, thanks to your jewel,
your Pitt's-di'mond of a son there. So
we part here, and depend upon it you're
better without me—that's all my comfort,
or my heart would break. The
carriage is waiting this long time, and
this young lover's ithing to be off.
God bless you both—that's my last
word.”
They called in Red Lion square,
punctual to the moment, on old Mr.
Reynolds, but his window shutters were

shut; he had been seized in the night
with a violent fit of the gout, which, as
he said, held him fast by the leg.— 
“But here,” said he, giving lord Colambre
a letter, “here's what will do
your business without me. Take this
written acknowledgment I have penned
for you, and give my granddaughter her
father's letter to read—it would touch a
heart of stone—touched mine—wish I
could drag the mother back out of your
grave, to do her justice—all one now.— 
You see at last I'm not a suspicious
rascal, however, for I don't suspect you
of palming a false granddaughter upon
me.”
“Will you,” said lord Colambre,
“give your grand-daughter leave to
come up to town to you, sir? You
would satisfy yourself at least as to
what resemblance she may bear to her
father: miss Reynolds will come instantly,
and she will nurse you.”
“No, no, I won't have her come. If
she comes, I won't see her—shan't begin

by nursing me—not selfish. As
soon as I get rid of this gout, I shall be
my own man, and young again, and I'll
soon be after you across the sea, that
shan't stop me: I'll come to—what's
the name of your place in Ireland?—and
see what likeness I can find to her poor
father in this granddaughter of mine,
that you puffed so finely yesterday.
And let me see whether she will weedle
me as finely as Mrs. Petito would.
Don't get ready your marriage settlements,
do you hear, till you have seen
my will, which I shall sign at—what's
the name of your place? Write it
down there; there's pen and ink; and
leave me, for the twinge is coming, and
I shall roar.”
“Will you permit me, sir, to leave
my own servant with you to take care
of you. I can answer for his attention
and fidelity.”
“Let me see his face and I'll tell
you. Lord Colambre's servant was
summoned.

“Yes, I like his face. God bless
you, leave me.”
Lord Colambre gave his servant a
charge to bear with Mr. Reynolds's
rough manner and temper, and to pay
the poor old gentleman every possible
attention. Then our hero proceeded
with his father on his journey, and on
this journey nothing happened worthy
of note. On his first perusal of the letter
from Grace, lord Colambre had feared
that she would have left Buxton with
lady Berryl before he could reach it; 
but upon recollection, he hoped that the
few lines he had written, addressed to
his mother and miss Nugent, with the
assurance that he should be with them
on wednesday, would be sufficient to
show her that some great change had
happened, and consequently sufficient
to prevent her from quitting her aunt,
till she could know whether such a separation
would be necessary. He argued
wisely, more wisely than Grace
had reasoned: for, notwithstanding this

note, she would have left Buxton before
his arrival, but for lady Berryl's strength
of mind, and positive determination,
not to set out with her till lord Colambre
should arrive to explain. In the
interval, poor Grace was, indeed, in
an anxious state of suspense; and her
uncertainty, whether she was doing
right or wrong, by staying to see lord
Colambre, tormented her most.
“My dear, you cannot help yourself:
be quiet,” said lady Berryl; “I
will take the whole upon my conscience; 
and I hope my conscience may
never have any thing worse to answer
for.”
Grace was the first person who, from
her window, saw lord Colambre, the
instant the carriage drove to the door.
She ran to her friend lady Berryl's
apartment—
“He is come!—Now, take me
away!”
“Not yet, my sweet friend! Lie
down upon this sofa, if you please;

and keep yourself tranquil, whilst I go
and see what you ought to do; and depend
upon me for a true friend, in
whose mind, as in your own, duty is
the first object.”
“I depend on you entirely,” said
Grace, sinking down on the sofa: “and
you see I obey you!”
“Many thanks to you for lying
down, when you can't stand.”
Lady Berryl went to lady Clonbrony's
apartment; she was met by sir Arthur.
“Come, my love! come quick!—lord
Colambre is arrived.”
“I know it; and does he go to Ireland?
Speak instantly, that I may tell
Grace Nugent.”
“You can tell her nothing yet, my
love; for we know nothing. Lord Colambre
will not say a word till you
come; but I know, by his countenance,
that he has good and extraordinary
news!”
They passed rapidly along the passage,
to lady Clonbrony's room.

“O! my dear, dear lady Berryl,
come! or I shall die with impatience,” 
cried lady Clonbrony, in a voice and
manner between laughing and crying.
—“There, now you have congratulated,
are very happy, and very glad,
and all that—now, for mercy's sake,
sit down, lord Clonbrony! for Heaven's
sake, sit down—beside me, here—or
any where! Now, Colambre, begin; 
and tell us all at once!”—
But as nothing is so tedious as a twice
told tale, Lord Colambre's narrative
need not here be repeated. He began
with count O'Halloran's visit, immediately
after lady Clonbrony had left
London; and went through the history
of the discovery, that captain Reynolds
was the husband of miss St.
Omar, and the father of Grace; the
dying acknowledgement of his marriage; 
the packet, delivered by count
O'Halloran to the careless ambassador— 
how recovered, by the assistance of his
executor, sir James Brooke; the travels

from Wrestham to Toddrigton, and
thence to Red Lion Square; the interview
with old Reynolds, and its final
result: all was related as succinctly as
the impatient curiosity of lord Colambre's
auditors could desire.
“O, wonder upon wonder! and
joy upon joy!” cried lady Clonbrony.
“So my darling Grace is as legitimate
as I am, and an heiress, after all.— 
Where is she? where is she? In your
room, lady Berryl? O, Colambre, why
wouldn't you let her be by—lady Berryl,
do you know, he would not let me
send for her, though she was the person
of all others most concerned.”
“For that very reason, ma'am; and
that lord Colambre was quite right, I
am sure you must be sensible, when
you recollect that Grace has no idea
that she is not the daughter of Mr. Nugent; 
she has no suspicion that the
breath of blame ever lighted upon her
mother. This part of the story cannot
be announced to her with too much

caution; and indeed her mind has been
so much harrassed and agitated, and she
is at present so far from strong, that
great delicacy—”
“True! very true, lady Berryl,” interrupted
lady Clonbrony; “and I'll
be as delicate as you please about it
afterwards: but, in the first and foremost
place, I must tell her the best
part of the story—that she's an heiress,
madam, never killed any body!”
So, darting through all opposition,
lady Clonbrony made her way into the
room where Grace was lying—“Yes,
get up! get up! my own Grace, and
be surprised—well you may!—you are
an heiress, after all.”
“Am I, my dear aunt,” said
Grace.
“True, as I'm lady Clonbrony—and
a very great heiress—and no more Colambre's
cousin than lady Berryl here.
So now begin and love him as fast as
you please—I give my consent—and
here he is.”

Lady Clonbrony turned to her son,
who just appeared at the door.
“O, mother! what have you done?”
“What have I done?” cried lady
Clonbrony, following her son's eyes:— 
“Lord, bless me!”—Grace fainted
dead—“Lady Berryl! O, what have
I done?—My dear lady Berryl, what
shall we do?”
“There! her colour's coming again,” 
said lord Clonbrony; “come away, my
dear lady Clonbrony, for the present,
and so will I—though I long to talk to
the darling girl myself; but she is not
equal to it yet.”
When Grace came to herself, she
first saw lady Berryl leaning over her,
and raising herself a little, she said,
“What has happened?—I don't
know yet—I don't know whether I am
happy or not.”
Then seeing lord Colambre, she sat
quite upright. “You received my letter,
cousin, I hope?—Do you go to
Ireland with my aunt?”

“Yes; and with you, I hope, my
beloved friend,” said Colambre; “you
once assured me that I had such a share
of your esteem and affection, that the
idea of my accompanying you to Ireland
was not disagreeable to you; you flattered
me that I formed part of your
agreeable associations with home.”
“Yes—sit down by me, won't you,
my dear lady Berryl—but then I considered
you as my cousin, lord Colambre:
and I thought you felt the same
towards me—but now—”
“But now,” my charming Grace,” 
said lord Colambre, kneeling beside her,
and taking her hand; “no invincible
obstacle oppose my passion—no invincible
obstacle, did I say? let me hope
that I may say, no obstacle, but what
depends on the change in the nature of
your sentiments. You heard my mother's
consent; you saw her joy.”
“I scarcely knew what I heard or
saw,” said Grace, blushing deeply; “or
what I now see and hear—but of this

I feel secure, before I comprehend the
mystery, before you explain to me the
causes of your ... change of conduct,
that you have never been actuated by
caprice, but governed by wise and honourable
motives. As to my going to
Ireland, or remaining with lady Berryl,
she has heard all the circumstances— 
she is my friend and yours—a better
friend cannot be; to her I appeal—she
will decide for me what I ought to do
—she promised to take me from hence
instantly, if I ought to go.”
“I did—and I would do so without
hesitation, if any duty or any prudence
required it. But, after having heard
all the circumstances, I can only tell
you that I willingly resign the pleasure
of your companp.”
“But tell her, my dear lady Berryl,” 
said lord Colambre; “excellent friend
as you are—explain to her you can,
better than any of us—all that is to be
known: let her know my whole conduct,
and then let her decide for her

self, and I shall submit to her decision.
It is difficult, my dear Grace, to restrain
the expression of love, of passion,
such as I feel; but I have some power
over myself—you know it—and this I
can promise you, that your affections
shall be free as air—that no wishes of
friends, no interference, nothing but
your own unbiassed choice will I allow,
if my life depended upon it, to operate
in my favour. Be assured, my dearest
Grace,” added he, smiling as he retired,
“you shall have time to know
whether you are happy or not.”
The moment he had left the room,
she threw herself into the arms of her
friend, and her heart, oppressed with
various feelings, was relieved by tears
—a species of relief to which she was
not habituated.
“I am happy,” said she; “but what
was the invincible obstacle?—what was
the meaning of my aunt's words?— 
and what was the cause of her joy?
Explain all this to me, my dear

friend; for I am still as if I were in a
dream.”
With all the delicacy, which lady
Clonbrony deemed superfluous, lady
Berryl explained. Nothing could surpass
the astonishment of Grace, on first
learning that Mr. Nugent was not her
father; when she was told of the stigma
that had been cast on her birth; the
suspicions, the disgrace, to which her
mother had been subjected for so many
years—that mother, whom she had so
loved and respected; who had with
such care instilled into the mind of her
daughter the principles of virtue and
religion; that mother, whom Grace
had always seen the example of every
virtue she taught; on whom her daughter
never suspected that the touch of
blame, the breath of scandal, could rest.
Grace could express her sensations only
by repeating, in tones of astonishment,
pathos, indignation—“My mother!— 
my mother!—my mother!”
For some time she was incapable of

attending to any other idea, or of feeling
any other sensations. When her
mind was able to admit the thought, her
friend soothed her, by recalling the expressions
of lord Colambre's love—the
struggle by which he had been agitated,
when he fancied a union with her opposed
by an invincible obstacle.
Grace sighed; and acknowledged that
in prudence it ought to have been an
invincible obstacle—she admired the
firmness of his decision, the honour
with which he had acted towards her.
One moment she exclaimed—“Then,
if I had been the daughter of a mother
who had conducted herself ill, he never
would have trusted me?”
The next moment, she recollected
with pleasure the joy she had just seen
in his eyes—the affection, the passion,
that spoke in every word and look.
Then dwelt upon the sober certainty,
that all obstacles were removed.
“And no duty opposes my loving
him! And my aunt wishes it! my

kind aunt! And I may think of him— 
You, my best friend, would not assure
me of this if you were not certain of the
truth—O, how can I thank you for all
your kindness, and for that best of all
kindness, sympathy. You see, your
calmness, your strength of mind supports
and tranquilises me. I would rather
have heard all I have just learnt, from
you than from any other person living.
I could not have borne it from any one
else. No one else knows my mind so
perfectly—yet my aunt is very good,
—and my dear uncle, should not I go
to him?—But he is not my uncle, she
is not my aunt. I cannot bring myself
to think that they are not my relations,
and that I am nothing to them.”
“You may be every thing to them,
my dear Grace,” said lady Berryl:
“whenever you please, you may be
their daughter.”
Grace blushed, and smiled, and
sighed, and was consoled. But then
she recollected her new relation, Mr.

Reynolds, her grandfather, whom she
had never seen, who had for years disowned
her—treated her mother with
injustice. She could scarcely think of
him with complaisancy: yet, when his
age, his sufferings, his desolate state
were represented, she pitied him; and,
faithful to her strong sense of duty,
would have gone instantly to offer
him every assistance and attention in
her power. Lady Berryl assured her
that Mr. Reynolds had positively forbidden
her going to him; and that he
had assured lord Colambre he would
not see her if she went to him. After
such rapid and varied emotions,
poor Grace desired repose, and her
friend took care that it should be secured
to her for the remainder of the
day.
In the mean time, lord Clonbrony
had kindly and judiciously employed
his lady in a discussion about certain
velvet furniture which Grace had painted
for the drawing-room at Clonbrony
castle.

In lady Clonbrony's mind, as in
some bad paintings, there was no keeping; 
all objects, great and small, were
upon the same level.
The moment her son entered the
room, her ladyship exclaimed,
“Every thing pleasant at once!
Here's your father tells me, Grace's
velvet furniture's all packed: really, Soho's
the best man in the world of his kind,
and the cleverest—and so, after all, my
dear Colambre, as I always hoped, and
prophesied, at last you will marry an
heiress.”
“And Terry,” said lord Clonbrony,
“will win his wager from Mordicai.”
“Terry!” repeated lady Clonbrony,
“that odious Terry! I hope, my lord,
that he is not to be one of my comforts
in Ireland.”
“No, my dear mother; he is much
better provided for than we could have
expected. One of my father's first objects
was to prevent him from being
any incumbrance to you. We consulted

him as to the means of making
him happy; and the knight acknowledged
that he had long been casting
a sheep's eye at a little snug place,
that will soon be open in his native
country—the chair of assistant barrister
at the sessions. ‘Assistant barrister!’ 
said my father, ‘but, my dear Terry,
you have all your life been evading the
laws, and very frequently breaking the
peace; do you think this has qualified
you peculiarly for being a guardian of
the laws?’ Sir Terence replied, ‘yes,
sure, set a thief to catch a thief is no
bad maxim. And did not Mr. Colquoun,
the Scotchman, get himself made
a great justice by his making all the
world as wise as himself, about thieves
of all sorts, by land and by water, and in
the air too, where he detected the mudlarks:
and is not Barrington chief justice of Botany bay?’
“My father now began to be seriously
alarmed, lest sir Terence should
insist upon his using his interest to

make him an assistant barrister. He
was not aware that five years' practice
at the bar was a necessary accomplishment
for this office; when, fortunately
for all parties, my good friend, count
O'Halloran, helped us out of the difficulty,
by starting an idea full of practical
justice. A literary friend of the
count's had been for some time promised
a lucrative situation under government; 
but, unfortunately, he was
a man of so much merit and ability, that
they could not find employment for him
at home, and they gave him a commission,
I should rather say a contract,
abroad, for supplying the army with
Hungarian horses. Now, the gentleman
had not the slightest skill in horse
flesh; and as sir Terence is a complete
jockey, the count observed that he
would be the best possible deputy for
his literary friend. We warranted him
to be a thorough going friend; and I do
think the coalition will be well for both
parties. The count has settled it all,

and I left sir Terence comfortably provided
for, out of your way, my dear
mother; and as happy as he could be,
when parting from my father.”
Lord Colambre was assiduous in engaging
his mother's attention upon any
subject which could for the present
draw her thoughts away from her young
friend; but at every pause in the conversation,
her ladyship repeated, “So
Grace is an heiress after all—so, after
all, they know they are not cousins— 
Well, I prefer Grace a thousand times
over to any other heiress in England.
No obstacle, no objection. They have
my consent. I always prophesied Colambre
would marry an heiress; but
why not marry directly?”
Her ardour and impatience to hurry
things forward seemed now likely to
retard the accomplishment of her own
wishes, and lord Clonbrony, who understood
rather more of the passion of
love, than his lady ever had felt, or
understood, saw the agony into which

she threw her son, and felt for his darling
Grace. With a degree of delicacy
and address, of which few would have
supposed lord Clonbrony capable, his
lordship co-operated with his son, in
endeavours to keep lady Clonbrony
quiet, and to suppress the hourly
thanksgivings of Grace's turning out an
heiress. On one point, however, she
vowed she would not be overruled,
she would have a splendid wedding
at Clonbrony castle; such as should
become an heir and heiress: and the
wedding she hoped would be immediately
on their return to Ireland; she
should announce the thing to her
friends directly on her arrival at Clonbrony
castle.
“My dear,” said lord Clonbrony,
“we must wait in the first place the
pleasure of old Mr. Reynolds' fit of
the gout.”
“Why that's true, because of his
will,” said her ladyship; “but a will's

soon made, is not it? that can't be
much delay.”
“And then there must be settlements,” 
said lord Clonbrony; “they take
time. Lovers, like all the rest of mankind,
must submit to the law's delay.
—In the mean time, my dear,” said
lord Clonbrony, “as these Buxton
baths agree with you so well, and as
Grace does not seem to be over and
above strong for travelling a long journey,
and as there are many curious
and beautiful scenes of nature here in
Derbyshire—Mattlock, and the Wonders
of the Peak, and so on, which the
young people would be glad to see
together, and may not have another
opportunity soon—why not rest ourselves
a little. For another reason,
too,” continued his lordship, bringing
together as many arguments as he
could, for he had often found, that
though lady Clonbrony was a match
for any single argument, her understanding

could be easily overpowered
by a number, of whatever sort. “Besides,
my dear, here's sir Arthur and
lady Berryl, come to Buxton on purpose
to meet us; and we owe them
some compliment, and something more
than compliment, I think: so I don't
see why we should be in a hurry to
leave them, or quit Buxton—a few
weeks sooner or later can't signify— 
and Clonbrony castle will be getting
all the while into better order for us.
Burke is gone down there, and if we
stay here quietly, there will be time
for the velvet furniture to get there
before us, and to be unpacked, and up
in the drawing-room.”
“That's true, my lord,” said lady
Clonbrony; “and there is a great deal
of reason in all you say—so I second
that motion, as Colambre, I see, subscribes
to it.”
They staid some time in Derbyshire,
and every day lord Clonbrony proposed
some pleasant excursion, and contrived

that the young people should be left to
themselves, as Mrs. Broadhurst used so
strenuously to advise. The recollection
of whose authoritative maxims fortunately
still operated upon lady Clonbrony,
to the great ease and advantage
of the lovers.
Happy, as a lover, a friend, a son; 
happy, in the consciousness of having
restored a father to respectability, and
persuaded a mother to quit the feverish
joys of fashion for the pleasures of domestic
life; happy, in the hope of winning
the whole heart of the woman he
loved, and whose esteem, he knew, he
possessed and deserved; happy, in developing
every day, every hour, fresh
charm in his destined bride—we leave
our hero, returning to his native country.
And we leave him with the reasonable
expectation, that he will support,
through life, the promise of his early
character: that his patriotic views will
extend with his power to carry wishes

into action; that his attachment to his
warm-hearted countrymen will still increase
upon further acquaintance; and
that he will long diffuse happiness
through the wide circle which is peculiarly
subject to the influence and example
of a great resident Irish proprietor.
Letter from Larry to his brother Pat
Brady, at Mr. Mordicai's, coachmaker,
London.
“My dear Brother,
“Your's of the 16th, inclosing the
five pound note for my father, came
safe to hand Monday last; and, with
his thanks and blessing to you, he
commends it to you herewith inclosed
back again, on account of his being
in no immediate necessity, nor likelihood
to want in future, as you shall
hear forthwith; but wants you over
with all speed, and the note will
answer for travelling charges; for we
can't enjoy the luck it has pleased

God to give us, without yees: put
the rest in your pocket, and read it
when you've time.
“Old Nick's gone, and St. Dennis
along with him, to the place he come
from—praise be to God! The ould
lord has found him out in his tricks; 
and I helped him to that, through the
young lord that I driv, as I informed
you in my last, when he was a Welchman,
which was the best turn ever I
did, though I did not know it no more
than Adam that time. So ould Nick's
turned out of the agency clean and
clear; and the day after it was known,
there was surprising great joy through
the whole country; not surprising
either, but just what you might, knowing
him, rasonably expect. He (that
is, old Nick and St. Dennis) would
have been burnt that night—I mane, in
effigy, through the town of Clonbrony,
but that the new man, Mr. Burke,
come down that day too soon to stop it,
and said, ‘it was not becoming to

trample on the fallen,’ or something
that way, that put an end to it; and
though it was a great disappointment to
many, and to me in particular, I could
not but like the jantleman the better for
it any how. They say, he is a very
good jantleman, and as unlike old Nick
or the saint as can be; and takes no
duty fowl, nor glove, nor sealing money; 
nor asks duty work, nor duty
turf. Well, when I was disappointed
of the effigy, I comforted myself by
making a bonfire of old Nick's big rick
of duty turf, which, by great luck, was
out in the road, away from all dwelling
house, or thatch, or yards, to take fire; 
so no danger in life or objection. And
such another blaze! I wished you'd
seed it—and all the men, women, and
children in the town and country, far
and near, gathered round it, shouting
and dancing like mad!—and it has light
as day quite across the bog, as far as
Bartley Finnigan's house. And I heard
after, they seen it from all parts of the

three counties, and they thought it
was St. John's Eve in a mistake—or
couldn't make out what it was; but
all took it in good part, for a good sign,
and were in great joy. As for St. Dennis
and ould Nick, an attorney had his
foot upon 'em, with an habere a latitat,
and three executions hanging over 'em:
and there's the end of rogues! and a
great example in the country. And— 
no more about it: for I can't be wasting
more ink upon them that don't desarve
it at my hands, when I want it
for them that do, you shall see. So
some weeks past, and there was great
cleaning at Clonbrony castle, and in
the town of Clonbrony; and the new
agent's smart and clever: and he had
the glaziers, and the painters, and the
slaters up and down in the town whereever
wanted; and you wouldn't know
it again.—Think's I, this is no bad
sign! Now, cock up your ears, Pat!
for the great news is coming, and the
good. The master's come home—long

life to him!—and family come home
yesterday, all entirely! The ould lord
and the young lord, (ay, there's the
man, Paddy!) and my lady, and miss
Nugent. And I driv miss Nugent's
maid, that maid that was, and another; 
so I had the luck to be in it along wid
'em, and see all, from first to last. And
first, I must tell you, my young lord
Colambre remembered and noticed me
the minute he lit at our inn, and condescended
to beckon at me out of the
yard to him, and axed me—‘Friend
Larry,’ says he, ‘did you keep your
promise?’&wblank;My oath again the
whiskey, is it? says I. My lord,
I surely did, said I, which was true,
as all the country knows I never tasted
a drop since. And I'm proud to see
your honour, my lord, as good as your
word too, and back again among us.
So then there was a call for the horses; 
and no more at that time passed betwix'
my young lord and me, but that he
pointed me out to the ould one, as I

went off. I noticed and thanked him
for it in my heart, though I did not know
all the good was to come of it. Well,
no more of myself, for the present.
“Ogh, it's I drive 'em well; and we all
got to the great gate of the park before
sunset, and as fine an evening as ever
you see; with the sun shining on the
tops of the trees, as the ladies noticed; 
the leaves changed, but not dropped,
though so late in the season. I believe
the leaves knew what they were about,
and kept on, on purpose to welcome
them; and the birds were singing, and
I stopped whistling, that they might
hear them: but sorrow bit could they
hear when they got to the park-gate,
for there was such a crowd, and such a
shout, as you never see—and they had
the horses off every carriage entirely
and drew 'em home, with blessings,
through the park. And, God bless 'em,
when they got out, they didn't go shut
themselves up in the great drawing-room,
but went straight out to the tirrass,

to satisfy the eyes and hearts that
followed them. My lady laning on
my young lord, and miss Grace Nugent
that was, the beautifullest angel
that ever you set eyes on, with the
finest complexion and sweetest of
smiles, laning upon the ould lord's
arm, who had his hat off, bowing to
all, and noticing the old tenants as he
passed by name. O, there was great
gladness and tears in the midst; for joy
I could scarce keep from myself.
“After a turn or two upon the
tirrass, my lord Colambre quit his mother's
arm for a minute, and he come to
the edge of the slope, and looked down
and through all the crowd for some one.
“Is it the widow O'Neill, my lord?
says I, she's yonder, with the spectacles
on her nose, betwixt her son and
daughter, as usual.
“Then, my lord beckoned, and they
did not know which of the tree would
stir; and then he gave tree beckons
with his own finger, and they all tree

came fast enough to the bottom of the
slope forenent my lord; and he went
down and helped the widow up, (O, he's
the true jantleman) and brought 'em all
tree up on the tirrass, to my lady and
miss Nugent; and I was up close after,
that I might hear, which wasn't manners,
but I could'nt help it. So what
he said I don't well know, for I could
not get near enough after all. But I
saw my lady smile very kind, and take
the widow O'Neill by the hand, and
then my lord Colambre 'troduced Grace
to miss Nugent, and there was the word
namesake, and something about a check
curtains; but whatever it was, they
was all greatly pleased: then my lord
Colambre turned and looked for Brian,
who had fell back, and took him with
some commendation to my lord his father.
And my lord the master said,
which I didn't know till after, that they
should have their house and farm at the
ould rent; and at the surprise, the widow
dropped down dead; and there

was a cry as for ten berrings. ‘Be
qu'ite,’ says I, ‘she's only kilt for joy;’ 
and I went and lift her up, for her son
had no more strength that minute than
the child new born; and Grace trembled
like a leaf, as white as the sheet, but not
long, for the mother came too, and was
as well as ever when I brought some
water, which miss Nugent handed to
her with her own hand.
“That was always pretty and good,” 
said the widow, laying her hand upon
miss Nugent, “and kind and good to
me and mine.”
“That minute there was music from
below. The blind harper, O'Neill, with
his harp, that struck up Gracey Nugent.”
“And that finished, and my lord
Colambre smiling with the tears standing
in his eyes too, and the ould lord
quite wiping his, I ran to the tirras
brink to bid O'Neill play it again; but
as I run, I thought I heard a voice call
Larry.

“Who calls Larry? says I.
“My lord Colambre calls you, Larry,” 
says all at once; and four takes me
by the shoulders and spins me round.
‘There's my young lord calling you,
Larry—run for your life.’
“So I run back for my life, and
walked respectful, with my hat in my
hand when I got near.
“Put on your hat, my father desires
it,” says my lord Colambre. The ould
lord made a sign to that purpose, but
was too full to speak. ‘Where's your
father?’ continues my young lord.— 
He's very ould, my lord, says I.— 
‘I didn't ax you how ould he was,’ 
says he; ‘but where is he?’—He's
behind the croud below, on account of
his infirmities; he couldn't walk so fast
as the rest, my lord, says I; but his
heart is with you, if not his body.— 
‘I must have his body too: so bring
him bodily before us; and this shall be
your warrant for so doing,’ said my
lord, joking. For he knows the natur

of us, Paddy, and how we love a joke
in our hearts, as well as if he had lived
all his life in Ireland; and by the same
token will, for that rason, do what he
pleases with us, and more may be than
a man twice as good, that never would
smile on us.
“But I'm telling you of my father.
‘I've a warrant for you, father, says
I; and must have you bodily before
the justice, and my lord chief-justice.
So he changed colour a bit at first; but
he saw me smile. ‘And I've done no
sin,’ said he; ‘and, Larry, you may
lead me now, as you led me all my
life.’
“And up the slope he went with me,
as light as fifteen; and when we got
up, my lord Clonbrony said, “I am
sorry an old tenant, and a good old tenant,
as I hear you were, should have
been turned out of your farm.”
“Don't fret, it's no great matter, my
lord,’ said my father. ‘I shall be soon

out of the way; but if you would be
so kind to speak a word for my boy
here, and that I could afford, while the
life is in me, to bring my other boy
back out of banishment—”
“Then,” says my lord Clonbrony,
‘I'll give you and your sons three
lives, or thirty-one years, from this day,
of your former farm. Return to it when
you please. And,’ added my lord Colambre,
‘the flaggers, I hope, will be
soon banished.’ O, how could I thank
him—not a word could I proffer—but
I know I clasped my two hands, and
prayed for him inwardly. And my father
was dropping down on his knees,
but the master would not let him; and
obsarved, that posture should only be
for his God. And, sure enough, in that
posture, when he was out of sight, we
did pray for him that night, and will all
our days.
“But before we quite his presence, he
called me back, and bid me write to

my brother, and bring you back, if
you've no objections to your own
country.
“So come, my dear Pat, and make
no delay, for joy's not joy complate
till you're in it—my father sends his
blessing, and Peggy her love. The
family entirely is to settle for good in
Ireland; and there was in the castle
yard last night a bonefire made by my
lord's orders of the ould yellow damask
furniture, to plase my lady, my lord
says. And the drawing-room, the butler
was telling me, is new hung; and
the chairs, with velvet as white as
snow, and shaded over with natural
flowers, by miss Nugent.—Oh! how I
hope what I guess will come true, and
I've rason to believe it will, for I
dream't in my bed last night, it did.
But keep yourself to yourself—that
miss Nugent, (who is no more miss
Nugent, they say, but miss Reynolds,
and has a new-found grandfather, and
is a big heiress, which she did not want

in my eyes, nor in my young lord's)
I've a notion, will be sometime, and
may be sooner than is expected, my
lady viscountess Colambre—so haste
to the wedding. And there's another
thing: they say the rich ould grandfather's
coming over;—and another
thing, Pat, you would not be out of
the fashion. And you see its growing
the fashion, not to be an Absentee.
“Your loving brother,
“Larry Brady.”