

“Gone!—for ever gone from me!” 
said lord Colambre, to himself, as the
carriage drove away. “Never shall I
see her more—never will I see her more
till she is married.”
Lord Colambre went to his own
room, locked the door, and was relieved,
in some degree, by the sense of
privacy; by the feeling, that he could
now indulge his reflections undisturbed.
He had consolation—he had done what
was honourable—he had transgressed
no duty, abandoned no principle—he
had not injured the happiness of any
human being—he had not, to gratify
himself, hazarded the peace of the woman
he loved—he had not sought to
win her heart. Of her innocent—her
warm, susceptible heart, he might, perhaps,

have robbed her—he knew it— 
but he had left it untouched, he hoped,
entire, in her own power, to bless with
it hereafter some man worthy of her.
In the hope that she might be happy,
lord Colambre felt relief; and in the
consciousness that he had made his
parents happy, he rejoiced: but, as
soon as his mind turned that way for
consolation, came the bitter concomitant
reflection, that his mother must be
disappointed in her hopes of his accompanying
her home, and of his living with
her in Ireland—she would be miserable
when she should hear that he was going
abroad into the army—and yet it must
be so—and he must write, and tell her
so. “The sooner this difficulty is off
my mind, the sooner this painful letter
is written, the better,” thought he.
“It must be done—I will do it immediately.”
He snatched up his pen, and began a
letter—
“My dear mother—miss Nugent—”

He was interrupted by a knock at his
door.
“A gentleman below, my lord,” said
a servant, “who wishes to see you.”
“I cannot see any gentleman. Did
you say I was at home?”
“No, my lord; I said you was not
at home, for I thought you would
not choose to be at home, and your own
man was not in the way for me to ask,
so I denied you: but the gentleman
would not be denied; he said, I must
come and see if you was at home. So,
as he spoke as if he was a gentleman
not used to be denied, I thought it
might be somebody of consequence,
and I showed him into the front drawing-room.
I think he said he was sure
you'd be at home for a friend from Ireland.”
“A friend from Ireland! Why did
did not you tell me that sooner?” said
lord Colambre, rising, and running
down stairs. “Sir James Brooke, I
dare say.”

No; not sir James Brooke—but one
he was almost as glad to see—count
O'Halloran!
“My dear count! the greater pleasure
for being unexpected.”
“I came to London but yesterday,” 
said the count; “but I could not be
here a day, without doing myself the
honour of paying my respects to lord
Colambre.”
“You do me not only honour, but
pleasure, my dear count. People, when
they like one another, always find each
other out, and contrive to meet, even in
London.”
“You are too polite to ask what
brought such a superannuated militaire
as I am,” said the count; “from his retirement
into this gay world again. A
relation of mine, who is one of our ministry,
knew that I had some maps and
plans, and charts, which might be serviceable
in an expedition they are planning.
I might have trusted my charts
across the channel, without coming myself

to convoy them, you will say. But
my relation fancied—young relations,
you know, if they are good for any
thing, are apt to overvalue the heads of
old relations—fancied that mine was
worth bringing all the way from Hallorancastle
to London, to consult with
tête a tête. So you know, when this
was signified to me by a letter from the
secretary in office, private, most confidential,
what could I do, but do myself
the honour to obey. For though
honour's voice cannot provoke the
silent dust yet ‘flattery soothes the
dull cold ear of age.’—But enough,
and too much of myself,” said the
count: “tell me, my dear lord, something
of yourself. I do not think England
seems to agree with you so well as
Ireland: for, excuse me, in point of
health, you don't look like the same
man I saw some weeks ago.”
“My mind has been ill at ease of
late,” said lord Colambre.
“Ay, there's the thing! The body

pays for the mind—but those who have
feeling minds, pain and pleasure altogether
computed, have the advantage; 
or at least they think so, for they would
not change with those who have them
not, were they to gain, by the bargain,
the most robust body that the most
selfish coxcomb, or the heaviest dunce
extant, ever boasted. For instance,
would you now, my lord, at this moment,
change altogether with major
Benson or captain Williamson, or even
our friend, ‘Eh, really now, 'pon honour,’ 
would you—I'm glad to see you
smile.”
“I thank you for making me smile,
for I assure you I want it. I wish—if
you would not think me encroaching
upon your politeness and kindness in
honouring me with this visit,—You
see,” continued he, opening the doors
of the back drawingroom, and pointing
to large packages; “You see we are
all preparing for a march; my mother

has left town half an hour ago—my father
engaged to dine abroad—only I at
home—and, in this state of confusion,
could I even venture to ask count
O'Halloran to stay and dine with me,
without being able to offer him Irish
ortolans or Irish plums—In short; will
you let me rob you of two or three
hours of your time? I am anxious to
have your opinion on a subject of some
importance to me, and on one where
you are peculiarly qualified to judge
and decide for me.”
“My dear lord, frankly, I have nothing
half so good or so agreeable to do
with my time; command my hours.
I have already told you how much it
flatters me to be consulted by the most
helpless clerk in office; how much more
about the private concerns of an enlightened
young—friend, will lord Colambre
permit me to say—I hope so; 
for though the length of our acquaintance
might not justify the word, yet regard
and intimacy are not always in

proportion to the time people have
known each other, but to their mutual
perception of certain attaching qualities,
a certain similarity and suitableness
of character.”
The good count, seeing that lord Colambre
was in much distress of mind,
did all he could to soothe him by kindness; 
far from making any difficulty
about giving up a few hours of his time,
he seemed to have no other object in
London, and no purpose in life but to
attend to our hero. To put him at ease,
and to give him time to recover and
arrange his thoughts, the count talked of
indifferent subjects.
“I think I heard you mention the
name of sir James Brooke.”
“Yes, I expected to have seen him
when the servant first mentioned a
friend from Ireland; because sir James
had told me, that, as soon as he could get
leave of absence, he would come to
England.”
“He is come; is now at his estate in

Huntingdonshire; doing, what do you
think? I will give you a leading hint; 
recollect the seal which the little de
Cresey put into your hands the day
you dined at Oranmore. Faithful to
his motto ‘deeds not words,’ he is this
instant, I believe, at deeds, title deeds; 
making out marriage settlements, getting
ready to put his seal to the happy
articles.”
“Happy man! I give him joy,” said
lord Colambre; “happy man; going to
be married to such a woman—daughter
of such a mother!”
“Daughter of such a mother! That
is indeed a great addition and a great security
to his happiness,” said the
count. “Such a family to marry into; 
good from generation to generation; illustrious
by character as well as by genealogy; 
‘all the sons brave, and all
the daughters chaste.”
Lord Colambre with difficulty repressed
his feelings. “If I could choose,
I would rather that a woman I loved

were of such a family, than that she had
for her dower the mines of Peru.”
“So would I,” cried lord Colambre.
“I am glad to hear you say so, my
lord, and with such energy; so few
young men of the present day look to
what I call good connexion. In marrying,
a man does not, to be sure, marry
his wife's mother, and yet a prudent
man, when he begins to think of the
daughter would look sharp at the mother; 
ay and back to the grandmother
too, and along the whole female line of
ancestry.”
“True—most true—he ought.” he
must.”
“And I have a notion,—said the
count, smiling, “your lordship's practice
has been conformable to your theory.”
“I!—mine!” said lord Colambre,
starting and looking at the count with
surprise.
“I beg your pardon,” said the count,
“I did not intend to surprise your confidence.

But you forget that I was present,
and saw the impression which was
made on your mind by a mother's want
of a proper sense of delicacy and propriety
—lady Dashfort.”
“O, lady Dashfort! she was quite
out of my head.”
“And lady Isabel? I hope she is
quite out of your heart.”
“She never was in it,” said lord Colambre.
“Only laid siege to it,” said the
count. “Well, I am glad your heart did
not surrender at discretion, or rather
without discretion. Then, I may tell
you without fear or preface, that the lady
Isabel, who ‘talks of refinement, delicacy,
sense,’ is going to stoop at once
and marry—Heathcock.”
Lord Colambre was not surprised,
but concerned and disgusted as he
always felt, even when he did care for
the individual, from hearing any thing
which tended to lower the female sex
in public estimation.

“As to myself, said he, “I cannot
say I have had an escape, for I don't
think I ever was in much danger.”— 
It is difficult to measure danger when it
is over—past danger, like past pain, is
soon forgotten,” said the old general.
At all events, I rejoice in your present
safety.”
“But is she really going to be married
to Heathcock?” said lord Colambre.
“Positively—They all came over
in the same packet with me, and they
are all in town now, buying jewels
and equipages and horses—Heathcock,
you know, is as good as another man,
à peu près, nor all those purposes; his
father is dead and left him a large
estate. Que voulez vous?”—as the
French valet said to me on the occasion.
C'est que Monsieur est un homme de
bien: il a des biens à ce qu' on dit.”
Lord Colambre could not help smiling.
“How they got Heathcock to fall in

love, is what puzzles me,” said his
lordship. “I should as soon have
thought of an oyster's falling in love, as
that being!”
“I own, I should have sooner
thought,” replied the count, “of his falling
in love with an oyster; and so would
you, if you had seen him, as I did,
devouring oysters on ship-board!— 
‘Say, can the lovely heroine hope to vie
‘With a fat turtle, or a ven'son pie?’
But that is not our affair; let the lady
Isabel look to it.”
Dinner was announced; and no
further conversation of any consequence
passed between the count and lord Colambre,
till the cloth was removed,
and the servants had withdrawn. Then
our hero opened on the subject, which
was heavy at his heart.
“My dear count—to go back to the
burial-place of the Nugents, where my
head was lost the first time I had the
pleasure of seeing you—you know, or,

possibly,” said he, smiling, “you do
not know, that I have a cousin of the
name of Nugent?”
“You told me,” replied the count,
“that you had near relations of that
name; but I do not recollect, that you
mentioned any one in particular.”
“I never named miss Nugent to you.
—No! it is not easy to me to talk of
her, and impossible to me to describe
her. If you had come one half hour
sooner this morning, you would have
seen her: I know she is exactly suited
to your excellent taste. But it is not
at first sight she pleases most: she
gains upon the affections, attaches the
heart, and unfolds upon the judgment. In
temper, manners, and good sense—in
every quality a man can or should desire
in a wife, I never saw her equal.
Yet, there is an obstacle, an invincible
obstacle, the nature of which I cannot
explain to you, that forbids me to think
of her as a wife. She lives with my
father and mother: they are returning

to Ireland. I wished, earnestly wished,
on many accounts, to have accompanied
them, chiefly on my mother's: but it
cannot be. The first thing a man must
do, is to act honourably; and, that he
may do so, he must keep out of the way
of a temptation, which he believes to
be above his strength. I will never see
miss Nugent again, till she is married:
I must either stay in England, or go
abroad.—I have a mind to serve a campaign
or two, if I could get a commission
in a regiment going to Spain; but
I understand, so many are eager to go
at this moment, that it is very difficult
to get a commission in such a regiment.”
“It is difficult,” said the count.
“But,” added he, after thinking for a
moment, “I have it! I can get the
thing done for you, and directly. Major
Benson, in consequence of that affair,
you know, about his mistress, is
forced to quit the regiment. When the

the lieutenant-colonel came to quarters,
and the rest of the officers heard the
fact, they would not keep company
with Benson, and would not mess with
him. I know he wants to sell out; 
and that regiment is to be ordered immediately
to Spain: I will have the
thing done for you, if you request it.”
“First, give me your advice, count
O'Halloran: you are well acquainted
with the military profession, with military
life.—Would you advise me—I
won't speak of myself, because we judge
better by general views, than by particular
cases—Would you advise a
young man at present, to go into the
army?”
The count was silent for a few
minutes, and then replied: “Since
you seriously ask my opinion, my lord,
I must lay aside my own prepossessions,
and endeavour to speak with impartiality.
To go into the army in these
days, my lord, is, in my sober opinion,
the most absurd and base, or the wisest

and noblest thing a young man can do.
To enter into the army, with the hope
of escaping from the application necessary
to acquire knowledge, letters, and
science—I run no risk, my lord, in
saying this to you—To go into the
army, with the hope of escaping from
knowledge, letters, science, and morality; 
to wear a red coat, and an epaulette; 
to be called captain; to figure
at a ball; to lounge away time in country
sports, at country quarters, was
never, even in times of peace, creditable; 
but it is now absurd and base.
Submitting to a certain portion of ennui
and contempt, this mode of life for an
officer was formerly practicable—but
now, cannot be submitted to without
utter, irremediable disgrace. Officers
are now, in general, men of education
and information; want of knowledge,
sense, manners, must consequently be
immediately detected, ridiculed, and
despised in a military man. Of this,
we have not long since seen lamentable

examples in the raw officers, who have
lately disgraced themselves in my neighbourhood,
in Ireland—that major
Benson and captain Williamson. But
I will not advert to such insignificant
individuals, such are rare exceptions
—I leave them out of the question
—I reason on general principles. The
life of an officer is not now a life of
parade, of coxcombical, or of profligate
idleness—but of active service, of continual
hardship and danger. All the
descriptions which we see in ancient
history of a soldier's life, descriptions
which, in times of peace, appeared
like romance, are now realized; military
exploits fill every day's newspapers,
every day's conversation. A martial
spirit is now essential to the liberty
and the existence of our own country.
In the present state of things, the military
must be the most honourable
profession, because the most useful.
Every movement of an army is followed,
wherever it goes, by the public

hopes and fears. Every officer must
now feel, besides this sense of collective
importance, a belief that his only
dependance must be on his own merit— 
and thus his ambition, his enthusiasm,
are raised; and when once this noble
ardour is kindled in the breast, it excites
to exertion, and supports under endurauce.
But I forget myself,” said
the count, checking his enthusiasm,
“I promised to speak soberly. If I
have said too much, your own good
sense, my lord, will correct me, and
your good-nature will forgive the prolixity
of an old man, touched upon his
favourite subject—the passion of his
youth.”
Lord Colambre, of course, assured
the count, that he was not tired. Indeed,
the enthusiasm with which this
old officer spoke of his profession, and
the high point of view in which he
placed it, increased our hero's desire to
serve a campaign abroad. Good sense,
politeness, and experience of the world,

preserved count O'Halloran from that
foible, with which old officers are commonly
reproached, of talking continually
of their own military exploits.
Though retired from the world, he had
contrived, by reading the best books,
and corresponding with persons of good
information, to keep up with the current
of modern affairs; and he seldom
spoke of those in which he had
been formerly engaged. He rather
too studiously avoided speaking of
himself: and this fear of egotism
diminished the peculiar interest he
might have inspired: it disappointed
curiosity, and deprived those with
whom he conversed of many entertaining
and instructive anecdotes. However,
he sometimes made exceptions to
his general rule in favour of persons
who peculiarly pleased him, and lord
Colambre was of this number.
He this evening, for the first time,
spoke to his lordship of the years he
had spent in the Austrian service; told

him anecdotes of the emperor; spoke
of many distinguished public characters
whom he had known abroad; of those
officers who had been his friends and
companions. Among others, he mentioned
with particular regard a young
English officer, who had been at the
same time with him in the Austrian
service, a gentleman of the name of
Reynolds.
The name struck lord Colambre: it
was the name of the officer, who had
been the cause of the disgrace of miss
St. Omar,—of miss Nugent's mother.
—“But there are so many Reynoldses—”
He eagerly asked the age, the character
of this officer.
“He was a gallant youth,” said the
count, “but too adventurous, too rash.
He fell, after distinguishing himself in a
glorious manner, in his twentieth year,
—died in my arms.”
“Married or unmarried?” cried lord
Colambre.

“Married—he had been privately
married less than a year before his death
to a very young English lady, who had
been educated at a convent in Vienna.
He was heir to a considerable property,
I believe, and the young lady had little
fortune, and the affair was kept secret
from the fear of offending his friends, or
for some other reason,—I do not recollect
the particulars.”
“Did he acknowledge his marriage?” 
said lord Colambre.
“Never till he was dying—then he
confided his secret to me.”
“Do you recollect the name of the
young lady he married?”
“Yes—a miss St. Omar.”
“St. Omar!” repeated lord Colambre,
with an expression of lively joy in
his countenance. “But are you certain,
my dear count, that she was really
married, legally married to Mr. Reynolds
—her marriage has been denied by
all his friends and relations—hers have
never been able to establish it—her

daughter is—my dear count, were you
present at the marriage?”
“No;” said the count, “I was not
present at the marriage; I never saw
the lady; nor do I know any thing of
the affair, except that Mr. Reynolds,
when he was dying, assured me that he
was privately married to a miss St.
Omar, who was then boarding at a convent
in Vienna. The young man expressed
great regret at leaving her totally
unprovided for; but said, that he
trusted his father would acknowledge
her, and that her friends would be reconciled
to her.—He was not of age, he
said, to make a will; but I think he
told me that his child, who at that time
was not born, would, even if it should
he a girl, inherit a considerable property.
With this I cannot, however,
charge my memory positively: but he
put a packet into my hands, which, he
told me, contained a certificate of his
marriage, and, I think he said, a letter
to his father; this he requested that I

would transmit to England by some safe
hand. Immediately after his death I
went to the English ambassador, who was
then leaving Vienna, and delivered the
packet into his hands: he promised to
have it safely delivered. I was obliged
to go the next day with the troops to a
distant part of the country. When I returned
I inquired at the convent what
had become of miss St. Omar, I should
say Mrs. Reynolds, and I was told that
she had removed from the convent to
private lodgings in the town, some time
previous to the birth of her child. The
abbess seemed much scandalised by the
whole transaction; and I remember, I
relieved her mind by assuring her, that
there had been a regular marriage. For
poor young Reynolds's sake I made farther
inquiries about the widow, intending,
of course, to act as a friend,
if she was in any difficulty or distress.
But I found, on inquiry at her lodgings,
that her brother had come from
England for her, and had carried her

and her infant away. The active
scenes,” continued the count, “in
which I was immediately afterwards engaged,
drove the whole affair from my
mind—Now, that your questions have
recalled them, I feel certain of the facts
I have mentioned; and I am ready to
establish them by my testimony.”
Lord Colambre thanked him with an
eagerness that showed how much he was
interested in the event. It was clear, he
said, either that the packet left with the
ambassador had not been delivered, or
that the father of Mr. Reynolds had
suppressed the certificate of the marriage,
as it had never been acknowledged
by him or by any of the family.
Lord Colambre now frankly told the
count why he was so anxious about
this affair; and count O'Halloran, with
all the warmth of youth, and with all
the ardent generosity characteristic of
his country, entered into his feelings,
declaring, that he would never rest till
he had established the truth.

“Unfortunately,” said the count,
“the ambassador who took the packet
in charge is dead—I am afraid we shall
have difficulty.”
“But he must have had some secretary,” 
said lord Colambre; “who was
his secretary?—we can apply to him.”
“His secretary is now chargè d'affairs
in Vienna—we cannot get at
him.”
“Into whose hands have that ambassador's
papers fallen—who is his executor?” 
said lord Colambre.
“His executor!—now you have it,” 
cried the count. “His executor is the
very man who will do your business— 
your friend sir James Brooke is the executor.
All papers, of course, are in his
hands; or he can have access to any
that are in the hands of the family.
The family seat is within a few miles of
sir James Brooke's, in Huntingdonshire,
where, as I told you before, he now
is.”
“I'll go to him immediately,—set

out in the mail this night—just in
time,” cried lord Colambre, pulling out
his watch with one hand, and ringing
the bell with the other.
“Run and take a place for me in the
mail for Huntingdon. Go directly,” 
said lord Colambre to the servant.
—“And take two places, if you
please, sir,” said the count. “My lord,
I will accompany you.”
But this lord Colambre would not
permit, as it would be unnecessary to
fatigue the good old general; and a
letter from him to sir James Brooke
would do all that the count could effect
by his presence; the search for the papers
would be made by sir James, and
if the packet could be recovered, or if
any memorandum or mode of ascertaining
that it had actually been delivered
to old Reynolds could be discovered,
lord Colambre said he would then
call upon the count for his assistance,
and trouble him to identify the packet;

or to go with him to Mr. Reynolds to
make further inquiries, and to certify
at all events the young man's dying
acknowledgment of his marriage and of
his child.
The place in the mail, just in time,
was taken. Lord Colambre sent a servant
in search of his father with a note
explaining the necessity of his sudden
departure. All the business which remained
to be done in town he knew
lord Clonbrony could accomplish without
his assistance. Then he wrote a
few lines to his mother on the very
sheet of paper on which a few hours before
he had sorrowfully and slowly begun,
“My dear mother—miss Nugent,” 
he now joyfully and rapidly went on,
“My dear mother, and miss Nugent,
“I hope to be with you on Wednesday
sennight: but if unforeseen circumstances
should delay me, I will

certainly write to you again. Dear
mother, believe me,
“Your obliged and grateful son,
“Colambre.”
The count, in the mean time, wrote a
letter for him to sir James Brooke, describing
the packet which he had given
to the ambassador, and relating all the
circumstances that could lead to it's
recovery. Lord Colambre, almost before
the wax was hard, seized possession
of the letter; the count seeming almost
as eager to hurry him off as he was to
set out. He thanked the count with
few words, but with strong feeling.
Joy and love returned in full tide upon
our hero's soul; all the military
ideas, which but an hour before filled
his imagination, were put to flight:
Spain vanished, and green Ireland reappeared.
Just as they shook hands at parting,
the good old general, with a smile,
said to him,

“I believe I had better not stir in
the matter of Benson's commission, till
I hear more from you. My harangue
in favour of the military profession
will, I fancy, prove like most other
harangues en pure perte.