

Count Altenberg arrived at Clermont
park, and as Lord Oldborough was still
confined by the gout, Commissioner Falconer,
to his Lady's infinite satisfaction,
was deputed to show him every thing
that was worth seeing in this part of the
country. Every morning some party
was formed by Mrs. Falconer, and so
happily arranged, that her Georgiana and
the Count were necessarily thrown together.
The Count rode extremely well; 
Miss Falconers had been taught to ride
in a celebrated riding house, and were
delighted to display their equestrian
graces. When they were not disposed
to ride—the Count had a phaeton, and
Mrs. Falconer a barouche; and either in

the phaeton, or the barouche seat, Miss
Georgiana Falconer was seated with the
Count, who, as she discovered, drove
uncommonly well.
The Count had expressed a desire to
see the place where M. de Tourville had
been shipwrecked, and he really wished
to be introduced to the Percy family, of
whom, from the specimen he had seen in
Alfred, and from all the hospitality they
had shown the distressed mariners (some
of whom were his countrymen), he had
formed a favorable opinion. Half his
wish was granted, the rest dispersed in
empty air. Mrs. Falconer with alacrity
arranged a party for Percy-Hall, to show
the Count the scene of the Shipwreck— 
“She should be so glad to see it herself,
for she was absent from the country, at
the time of the sad disaster; but the
Commissioner, who knew the spot, and
all the circumstances, better than any
other person, would show them every
thing—and Sir Robert Percy, she was

sure, would think himself much honored
by Count Altenberg's visiting his place.”
Count Altenberg had some confused
recollection of Mr. Alfred Percy's having
told him, that his father no longer lived
at Percy-Hall; but this speech of Mrs.
Falconer's led the Count to believe, that
he had misunderstood what Alfred had
said.—
The party arranged for Percy-Hall
consisted of the Miss Falconers, the two
Lady Arlingtons, and some other young
people, who were at Falconer Court.— 
It was a fine morning, Mrs. Falconer
was all suavity and smiles, both the Miss
Falconers in charming hopes, and consequently
in charming spirits.—
Percy-Hall was really a beautiful place,
and Miss Arabella Falconer now looked
at it with the pleasure of anticipated
possession. Sir Robert Percy was not at
home, he had been obliged that morning
to attend on some special business; but
he had left orders with his steward and

house-keeper, to show the party of
visitors the house and grounds. In
going through the apartments, they came
to the gallery leading to the library,
where they were stopped by some workmen's
trestles, on which were lying two
painted glass windows, one that had been
taken down, and another, which was
to be put in it's stead. Whilst the workmen
were moving the obstacles out of the
way, the company had leisure to admire
the painted windows. One of them was
covered with coats of arms: the other
represented the fire at Percy-Hall, and
the portrait of Caroline, assisting the old
nurse down the staircase. This painting
immediately fixed Count Altenberg's
eye, and Miss Georgiana Falconer, not
knowing whose portrait it was, exclaimed,
as she looked at the figure of Caroline,
“Beautiful!—Exquisite! What a lovely
creature, that is assisting the old
woman!”
“Yes,” said Count Altenberg, “it is

one of the finest countenances, I ever
beheld!”
All the Ladies eagerly pressed forward
to look at it.
“Beautiful!—Don't you think it is
something like Lady Anne Cope?”— 
said Miss Falconer.
“Oh, dear, no!” cried Miss Georgiana
Falconer, “it is a great deal handsomer
than any of the Copes ever were,
or ever will be!”—
“It has a look of Lady Mary Nesbitt,” 
said one of the Lady Arlingtons.—
“The eyes are so like Lady Coningsby,
who is my delight,” said Georgiana.
“And it has quite the Arlington
nose,” said Mrs. Falconer, glancing her
eye upon the Lady Arlingtons. Count
Altenberg, without moving his eye, repeated,
“It is the most beautiful face, I ever
beheld.”

“Not nearly so beautiful as the original,
Sir,”—said the painter.
“The original?—Is it a copy?”
“A portrait, Sir.”—
“Oh, a family portrait of one of our
great, great grand-mother Percys, I
suppose,” said Miss Georgiana, “done
in her youth—in a fancy piece you
know, according to the taste of those
times—She must have been superlatively
lovely.”
“Ma'am,” said the painter, “the
young lady, of whom this is a portrait,
is, I hope and believe, now
living.”—
“Where?—And who can she be?— 
for I am sure I don't recollect ever
having seen her in all my life—never
met her in Town any where ... Pray
Sir, who may it be?”—added she, turning
to the artist, with a mixture of affected
negligence, and real pride.
“Miss Caroline Percy, Ma'am.”
“A daughter of Sir Robert Percy—of

the gentleman of this house” said Count
Altenberg eagerly.
Mrs. Falconer, and her daughter,
Georgiana, answered rapidly, with looks
of alarm, as they stood a little behind
the Count.
“Oh! no, no, Count Altenberg,” 
cried Mrs. Falconer, advancing—“Not
a daughter of the gentleman of this
house.. ... Another family, relations,
but distant relations of the Commissioner's— 
he formerly knew something of
them, but we know nothing of them.”
The painter however knew a great
deal, and seemed anxious to tell all he
knew: but Mrs. Falconer walked on
immediately, saying,
“This is our way, is not it? This leads
to the library, where, I dare say, we shall
find the book which the Count wanted”— 
The Count heard her not, for with his
eyes fixed on the picture he was listening
to the account, which the painter was
giving of the circumstance it recorded

of the fire at Percy-Hall.—Of the presence
of mind and humanity of Miss
Caroline Percy, who had saved the life
of the poor decrepit woman, who in the
picture was represented as leaning upon
her arm.—The painter paused, when he
came to this part of his story—“That
woman, was my mother, Sir,”—He
went on, and with all the eloquence of
filial affection and of gratitude, pronounced
in a few words a panegyric on
the family, who had been his first, and
his best benefactors—All who heard
him were touched with his honest
warmth, except the Miss Falconers.
“I dare say those Percys were very
good people in their day,” said Miss
Falconer, “but their day is over, and
no doubt you'll find, in the present possessor
of the estate, Sir, as good a patron
at least.”
The artist took up his pencil without
making any reply, and went on with
some heraldic devices he was painting.

“I am amazed, how you could see
any likeness in that face or figure to
Lady Anne Cope, or Lady Mary Nesbitt,
or any of the Arlingtons,” said Miss
Georgiana Falconer, looking through her
hand at the portrait of Caroline. ...
“It's the most beautiful thing I ever saw
certainly, but there's nothing of an air of
fashion, and without that,”. ...
“Count Altenberg, I have found for
you the very book, I heard you tell the
Commissioner last night you wished so
much to see,” said Mrs. Falconer. The Count
went forward to receive the book, and to
thank the lady for her polite attention; 
—she turned over the leaves, and showed
him some uncommonly fine prints, which
he was bound to admire—and whilst he
was admiring, Mrs. Falconer found a
moment to whisper to her daughter
Georgiana.
“Not a word more about the picture
—Let it alone, and it is only a picture,— 
dwell upon it, and you make it a
reality.”—

Miss Georgiana had quickness and
ability, sufficient to feel the value of her
mother's knowledge of the world, and of
human nature; but she had seldom sufficient
command of temper, to imitate or
to profit by Mrs. Falconer's address.
On this occasion she contented herself
with venting her spleen on the poor
painter, whose coloring and drapery she
began to criticise unmercifully.—Mrs.
Falconer, however, carried off the Count
with her into the library, and kept him
there, till the Commissioner, who had
been detained in the neighbouring village
by some electioneering business, arrived; 
and then they pursued their walk together
through the park.—Miss Falconer
was particularly delighted with the beauties
of the grounds. Miss Georgiana,
recovering her good humor, was again
charming—and all went on well; till
they came near the seashore, and the
Count asked Commissioner Falconer,
“to show him the place where the shipwreck
had happened.”—She was provoked,

that his attention should be withdrawn
from her, and again by these
Percys.—The Commissioner called
to one of the boatmen, who had been
ordered to be in readiness, and asked
him, “to point out the place, where the
Dutch vessel had been wrecked.”—The
man, who seemed rather surly, replied,
“that they could not see the right place
where they stood, and if they had a mind
to see it, they must come into the boat,
and row a piece up farther.”—
Now some of these town bred ladies
were alarmed at the idea of going to sea,
and though Miss Georgiana was very
unwilling to be separated from the
Count, and though her mother encouraged
the young lady to vanquish her
fears as much by precept and as little by
example as possible, yet when she was to
be handed into the boat, she drew back
in pretty terror, put her hands before her
face, and protested she could not venture
even with Count Altenberg.—After as

much waste of words, as the discussion
of such arrangements on a party of pleasure
usually involves, it was at length
settled, that only the Commissioner
should accompany the Count, that the
rest of the gentlemen and ladies should
pursue their walk, and that they should
all meet again at the park gate.—The
surly boatman rowed off, but he soon
ceased to be surly, when the Count
spoke of the humanity and hospitality,
which had been shown to some of his
countrymen by Mr. Percy. Immediately
the boatman's tongue was loosed.—
“Why, ay, Sir, if you bees curous
about that there gentleman, I can tell you
a deal about him. But them as comes
to see the new man does not covet to
hear talk of the old master—but nevertheless,
there's none like him,—he gave
me and wife that there white cottage
yonder, half ways up the bank, where
you see the smoke rising between the
trees—as snug a cottage it is!. ... But

that is no matter to you, Sir.—But I
wish you had but seed him the night of
the shipwreck, he and his sons, God
above bless him, and them—wherever
they are, if they're above ground, I'd
row out the worst night ever we had, to
set my eyes on them again before I die,
but for a minute.—Ay, that night of
the shipwreck, not a man was willing to
go out with them, or could be got out
the first turn, but myself” ...
Upon this text he spoke at large, entering
into a most circumstantial and
diffuse history of the shipwreck, mingling
his own praises with those which he
heartily bestowed upon the Percys of
the right good old branch. Commissioner
Falconer mean time was not in a
condition to throw in any thing in favor
of his new friend Sir Robert Percy; he
was taking pinch after pinch of snuff,
looking alternately at the water and the
boat, sitting stiffly upright in anxious silence.
Although in the incessant practice
of suppressing his own feelings, corporeal

and mental, from respect or complaisance
to his superiors in rank and
station, yet he presently found it beyond
the utmost efforts of his courtly philosophy,
to endure his qualms of mind and
body. Interrupting the talkative boatman,
he first conjured the orator to mind
what he was about; at last, Mr. Falconer
complaining of growing very sick,
the Count gave up all thoughts of proceeding
further, and begged the boatmen
to put them ashore as soon as they
could. They landed near the village,
which it was necessary that they should
pass through, before they could reach
the appointed place of meeting. The
poor Commissioner, whose stomach was
still disordered, and whose head was
giddy, observed that they had yet a long
walk to take, and proposed sending for
one of the carriages—accordingly they
waited for it at the village inn. The
Commissioner, after having made a multitude
of apologies to the Count, retired
to rest himself—during his absence the

Count, who, wherever he was, endeavored
to see as much as possible of the
manners of the people, began talking to
the landlord and landlady.—Again the
conversation turned upon the characters
of the late and the present possessors of
Percy-Hall; and the good people, by all
the anecdotes they told, and still more by
the affection and warm attachment they
expressed for the old banished family,
increased every moment his desire to be
personally acquainted with those, who
in adversity were preferred to persons
in present power and prosperity.—Count
Altenberg, young as he was, had seen
enough of the world to feel the full
value of eulogiums bestowed on those
who are poor, and who have no means
of serving in any way the interests of
their panegyrists.
When the carriage came, and the
Commissioner was sufficiently refitted
for conversation, the Count repeatedly
expressed his earnest wish to become acquainted
with that Mr. Percy and his

family, to whom his countrymen had
been so much obliged, and of whom he
said he had this morning heard so many
interesting anecdotes.—The Commissioner
had not been present when the
Count saw the picture of Caroline, nor
indeed did he enter into Mrs. Falconer's
matrimonial designs for her daughter
Georgiana. The Commissioner generally
saw the folly, and despaired of the
success of all castle-building but his own,
and his castles in the air were always on
a political plan. So without difficulty
he immediately replied, that nothing
would give him more pleasure, than to
introduce the Count to his relations, the
Percys.—The moment this was mentioned,
however, to Mrs. Falconer, the
Commissioner saw through the complacent
countenance, with which she forced
herself to listen to him, that he had
made some terrible blunder, for which
he should have to answer in private.
Accordingly the first moment they
were alone, Mrs. Falconer reproached

him with the rash promise he had made.
“I shall have all the difficulty in the
world, to put this out of the Count's
head. I thought Mr. Falconer, that
you had agreed to let those Percys
drop.”
“So I would if I could, my dear; but
how can I, when Lord Oldborough persists
in holding them up?—You must go
and see them, my dear.”
“I!” cried Mrs. Falconer, with a
look of horror—“I!—not I! indeed— 
Lord Oldborough holds up only the gentlemen
of the family—his Lordship has
nothing to do with the ladies, I suppose.
Now, you know visiting can go on vastly
well to all eternity, between the gentlemen
of a family, without the ladies
having any sort of intimacy or acquaintance
even.—You and Mr. Percy ... if
it is necessary for appearance” sake with
Lord Oldborough, may continue upon
the old footing; but I charge you, Commissioner,
do not involve me—and whatever

happens, don't take Count Altenberg
with you to the Hills.”—
“Why not, my dear?”
“My dear, I have my reasons.—You
were not in the gallery at Percy-Hall
this morning, when the Count saw that
painted glass window?”—
The Commissioner begged an explanation,
but when he had heard all Mrs.
Falconer's reasons, they did not seem to
strike him with the force she desired and
expected.—
“I will do as you please, my dear,” said
he, “and if I can, I will make the Count
forget my promised introduction to the
Percys; but all the time depend upon
it your fears and your hopes are both
equally vain. You ladies are apt to take
it for granted, that men's heads are always
running on love.”
“Young men's heads sometimes are,” 
said Mrs. Falconer.
“Very seldom in these days,” said
the Commissioner. “And love altogether,

as one should think you might
know by this time, Mrs. Falconer,—a
sensible woman of the world, as you
are,—but no woman, even the most sensible,
can ever believe it. ... Love altogether
has surprisingly little to do, in
the real management and business of the
world.”
“Surprisingly little,” replied Mrs.
Falconer, placidly. “But seriously, my
dear, here is an opportunity of making
an excellent match for Georgiana, if you
will be so obliging as not to counteract
me.”
“I am the last man in the world to
counteract you, my dear; but it will
never do,” said Mr. Falconer, “and
you will only make Georgiana ridiculous,
as she has been several times already,
from the failure of these love-matches.— 
I tell you, Mrs. Falconer,
Count Altenberg is no more thinking
of love than I am—nor is he a man in
the least likely to fall in love.”
“He is more than half in love with

my Georgiana already,” said the mother,
“if I have any eyes.”
“You have eyes, and very fine eyes,
my dear, as every body knows, and no
one better than myself—they have but
one defect.”
“Defect!”
“They sometimes see more than exists.”
“You would not be so incredulous,
Mr. Falconer, if you had seen the rapture,
with which the Count listens to
Georgiana when she plays on the harp.
—He is prodigiously fond of music.”
“And of painting too,” said the Commissioner,
“for by your account of the
matter, he seemed to be more than half
in love also with a picture yesterday
morning.”
“A picture is no very dangerous rival,
except in a modern novel,” replied
Mrs. Falconer.—“But beware, Commissioner— 
and remember, I understand
these things; I warn you in time, beware
of the original of that picture, and

never again talk to me of going to see
those Percys; for though the girl may
be only an unfashioned country beauty,
and Georgiana has so many polished advantages,
yet there is no knowing what
whim a young man might take into his
head.”
The Commissioner, though he remained
completely of his own opinion, that
Mrs. Falconer's scheme for Georgiana
would never do, disputed the point
no farther, but left the room, promising
all she required, for promises cost him
nothing. To do him justice he recollected
and endeavored to the best of his
power to keep his promise, for the next
morning he took his time so well to propose
a ride to the Hills, just at the moment
when Lord Oldborough and the
Count were deep in a conversation on
the state of continental politics, that his
Lordship would not part with him—The
Commissioner paid his visit alone; and
Mrs. Falconer gave him credit for
his address; but scarcely had she congratulated

herself, when she was thrown
again into terror&wblank;The Commissioner
had suggested to Lord Oldborough the
propriety and policy of giving, whilst he
was in the country, a popularity-ball— 
His Lordship assented, and Mrs. Falconer,
as usual, was to take the trouble
off his hands, and to give an entertainment
to his Lordship's friends.—Lord
Oldborough had not yet recovered from
the gout, and he was glad to accept of
her offer: his Lordship not being able to
appear, or to do the honors of the fête,
was a sufficient apology for his not giving
it at Clermont-Park.
The obsequious Commissioner begged
to have a list of any friends, whom Lord
Oldborough particularly wished to have
invited, but his Lordship, with a look of
absence replied, that he left all that entirely
to Mrs. Falconer; however, the very
evening of the day on which the Commissioner
paid his visit alone at the Hills,
Lord Oldborough put into his hands a list
of the friends who he wished should be

invited to the ball, and at the head of his
list were the Percys.
“The Percys! the very people I first
thought of,” said Mr. Falconer, commanding
his countenance carefully—but
I fear we cannot hope to have them, they
are at such a distance, and they have no
carriage.”
“Any of my carriages, all of them,
shall be at their command,” said Lord
Oldborough.
He rang instantly, and gave orders accordingly.
The Commissioner reported this to
Mrs. Falconer, observing, that he had
gone to the very brink of offending Lord
Oldborough to oblige her, as he knew,
by his Lordship's look and tone of voice; 
and that nothing now could be done, but
to visit the Percys, and as soon as possible,
and to send them a card of invitation
for the ball.
“And, my dear, whatever you do,
I am sure will be done with a good grace,” 
added the Commissioner, observing that

his Lady looked excessively discomfited.
“Very well, Commissioner, you will
have your daughter upon your hands,
that's all.”
“I should be as sorry for that, my
Love, as you could be; but what can be
done?—We must not lose the substance,
in running after the shadow.—Lord Oldborough
might turn short round upon
us.”—
“Not the least likely upon such a trifling
occasion as this, where no politics
are in question. What can Mrs. or Miss
Percys” being or not being at this ball
signify to Lord Oldborough—a man, who
never in his life thought of balls, or cared
any thing about women, and these are
women whom he has never seen.—What
interest can it possibly be of Lord Oldborough's?”
“I cannot tell you, my dear—I don't
see any immediate interest.—But there's
an old private friendship in the case.— 
Some way or other, I declare I cannot

tell you how that old cousin Percy of
mine has contrived to get nearer to Lord
Oldborough than any one living ever
could do—nearer to his heart.”
“Heart!—Private friendship!”—repeated
Mrs. Falconer, with a tone of ineffable
contempt. “Well, I only wish
you had said nothing about the matter
to Lord Oldborough, I could have managed
it myself.—Was there ever such
want of address!—When you saw the Percys
at the head of the list, was that a
time to say any thing about your fears of
their not coming?—Do you think Lord
Oldborough could not translate fears into
hopes?—Then to mention their having
no carriages!—when, if you had kept
your own counsel, that would have been
our sufficient excuse at last.—They must
have refused; nothing need have been
said about it till the night of the ball.— 
And I would lay my life, Lord Oldborough
would never, in the mean time, have
thought of it, or of them.—But so silly!

to object in that way, when you know
that the slightest contradiction wakens
Lord Oldborough's will; and then indeed
you might as well talk to his own Jupiter
tonans.—If his Lordship had set a beggar-woman's
name at the head of his list,
and you had objected that she had no
carriage, he would directly have answered— 
‘she shall have mine.’—Bless me!— 
It's wonderful that people can pique
themselves on address, and have so little
knowledge of character.”
“My dear,” said the Commissioner,
“if you reproach me from this time till to morrow,
the end of the matter will be,
that you must go and see the Percys.”— 
“I say, Mrs. Falconer,” added he, assuming
a peremptory tone, for which he
had acquired a taste from Lord Oldborough,
but had seldom courage or opportunity
to indulge in it,—“I say, Mrs.
Falconer, the thing must be done.”—He
rang the bell in a gloriously authoritative
manner, and ordered the carriage.

A visit paid thus upon compulsion
was not likely to be very agreeable, but
the complaints against the roads—the
dreadful distance, and the horrid necessity
of being civil, need not be recorded.
Miss Falconers exclaimed, when they at
last came to the Hills,—“La! I did not
think it was so tolerable a place!—Miss
Georgiana hoped that they should, at
least, see Miss Caroline Percy—she owned
she was curious to see that beautiful
original, of whom the painter at Percy—Hall,
and her brother Buckhurst, had
said so much.”
Mrs. Percy and Rosamond only were
at home. Caroline had taken a walk with
her father to a considerable distance.
Mrs. Falconer, who had, by this time,
completely recovered her self-command,
presented herself with such smiling grace,
and expressed, in such a tone of cordiality,
her earnest desire, now that she had
been so happy as to get into the country,
to enjoy the society of her friends and relations,

that Rosamond was quite charmed
into a belief of at least half of what
she said.—Rosamond was willing to attribute
all that had appeared, particularly
of late, in contradiction of this lady's
present professions, to some political motives
of Commissioner Falconer, whom
she disliked for his conduct to Buckhurst,
and whom she was completely willing to
give up, as a wordly-minded courtier.— 
But whilst the manners of the mother
operated thus with Rosamond in favor
of her moral character, even Rosamond's
easy faith, and sanguine benevolence,
could not see or hear any thing from the
daughters, that confirmed Mrs. Falconer's
flattering speeches; they sat in languid
silence, looking upon the animate and
inanimate objects in the room with the
same air of supercilious listlessness. They
could not speak so as to be heard, they
could not really understand any thing
that Rosamond said to them; they seemed
as if their bodies had been brought into

the room by mistake, and their souls
left behind them; not that they were in
the least timid, or abashed; no, they
seemed fully satisfied with their own inanity,
and proud to show, that they had
absolutely no ideas in common with those,
into whose company they had been thus
unfortunately compelled. Once or twice
they turned their heads with some signs
of vivacity, when the door opened, and
when they expected to see Miss Caroline
Percy enter: but though the visit was
protracted, in hopes of her return, yet
at last they were obliged to depart
without having their curiosity satisfied.
Mrs. Falconer's fears of rivalship for
her Georgiana were not diminished by
this visit. By those of the family whom
she saw this day, she judged of Caroline,
whom she had not seen; and she
had tact sufficient to apprehend, that the
conversation and manners of Mrs. Percy
and of Rosamond were such, as might,

perhaps, please a well-bred and well-informed
foreigner, better, even, than
the fashionable tone and air of the day,
of which he had not been long enough
in England to appreciate the conventional
value. Still Mrs. Falconer had
a lingering hope, that some difficulties
about dress, or some happy cold, might
prevent these dangerous Percys from accepting
the invitation to the ball.—When
their answers to her card came, she gave
one hasty glance at it.
“Will do themselves the honor”&wblank;
“My dear, you are alarming yourself
unnecessarily,” cried the Commissioner,
who pitied the distress visible, at
least to his eyes, in her countenance, or
who feared, perhaps, a renewal of reproaches
for his own want of address— 
“Quite unnecessarily, believe me—I
have had a great deal of conversation
with Count Altenberg since I spoke of
him to you last, and I am confirmed in
my opinion, that he merely feels the

curiosity natural to an enlightened traveller,
to become acquainted with Mr.
Percy, a man, who has been described
to him as a person of abilities.—And he
wants to thank him in the name of his
countrymen, who were assisted, you
know I told you, by the Percys, at the
time of the shipwreck.—You will see,
my dear, that the ladies of the family
will be nothing to him.”
Mrs. Falconer sighed, and bit her
lips.
“In half an hour's conversation, I
would engage to find out the ruling passion
of any man, young or old.—Now,
remember I tell you, Mrs. Falconer,
Count Altenberg's ruling passion is ambition.”
“Ruling passion,” repeated Mrs.
Falconer—One of your book-words, and
book-notions, that are always misleading
you in practice.—Ruling passion. Metaphysical
nonsense! As if men were
such consistent creatures, as to be ruled

regularly by one passion—when often
ten different passions pull a man, even
before your face, ten different ways, and
one cannot tell one hour what will be
the ruling passion of the next.—Tell me
the reigning fashion, and I will tell you
the ruling passion.—Luckily,” continued
Mrs. Falconer, after a pause of
deep consideration—“Georgiana is very
fashionable—one of the most fashionable
young women in England, as the Count
might have seen when he was in London
 ... But then, on the other hand, whether
he is judge enough of English manners.
 ... Georgiana must be well
dressed ... and I know the Count's taste
in dress; I have made myself mistress of
that—Commissioner, I must trouble you
for some money.”
“Mrs. Falconer. I have no money— 
And if I had,” said the Commissioner,
who always lost his temper when that
subject was touched upon—“If I had,
I would not give it you to throw away

upon such a losing game ... a nonsensical
speculation!—Georgiana has not
the least chance, nor has any other
English woman, were she as handsome
as Venus and dressed in bank notes
—Why, Mrs. Falconer, since you
put me in a passion, I must tell you a
secret.”
But checking himself, Mr. Falconer
stood for a moment silent, and went on
with “Count Altenberg has made up his
quarrel with the hereditary Prince, and
I have it from undoubted authority, that
he is to be the Prince's prime minister,
when he comes to the throne; and the
present Prince you know, as Cunningham
says, is so infirm and asthmatic,
that he may be carried off at any moment.”—
“Very well ... very likely. ... I
am glad of it,” said Mrs. Falconer—“But
where's the secret?”
“I've thought better of that, and I
cannot tell it you—But this much

I tell you positively, Mrs. Falconer,
that you will lose your labor, if you
speculate upon the Count for Georgiana.”
“Is he married?—Answer me that
question, and I will ask no more—And
that I have a right to ask.”
“No—not married—But I can tell no
more.—Only let me beg, that you will
just put all love notions out of Georgiana's
head and your own, or you'll make
the girl ridiculous, and expose yourself,
my dear. But, on the other hand, let
there be no deficiency of attention to
the Count, for all our civilities to him
will pay a hundred fold, and, perhaps,
sooner than you expect—for he may be
prime minister and prime favorite at Cunningham's
court in a month, and of
course will have it in his power to forward
Cunningham's interests.—That is
what I look to, Mrs. Falconer, for I am
long-sighted in my views, as you will
find.”

“Well! time will show—I am glad
you tell me he positively is not married,” 
concluded Mrs. Falconer—“As to the
rest, we shall see.”—