

Buckhurst Falconer returned to
Percy-Hall.
He came provided with something
like an excuse—He had business—His
father had desired him, to ask Mr. Percy
to take charge of a box of family papers
for him, as he apprehended, that,
when he was absent from the country,
his steward had not been as careful of
them as he ought to have been.—
Mr. Percy willingly consented to take
charge of the papers, but he desired, that,
before they were left with him, Buckhurst
should take a list of them.
Buckhurst was unprepared for this
task.
His head was intent on a ball and on
Caroline,—However he was obliged to undergo
this labor, and when he had finished

it, Mr. Percy, who happened to be preparing
some new leases of considerable
farms, was so busy, in the midst of his
papers, that there was no such thing as
touching upon the subject of the ball.— 
At length the ladies of the family appeared,
and all the parchments were at
last out of the way—Buckhurst began
upon his real business, and said he meant
to delay going to town a few days longer,
because there was to be a ball, early
in the ensuing week,—“Nothing more
natural,” said Mr. Percy, “than to wish
to go to a ball,—yet,” added he, gravely,
“when a man of honor gives his promise
that nothing shall prevent him from
commencing his studies immediately, I
did not expect that the first temptation”—
“Oh! my dear Mr. Percy,” said
Buckhurst, endeavoring to laugh away
the displeasure, or rather the disappointment
which he saw in Mr. Percy's countenance—“A
few days can make no difference.”

“Only the difference of a term,” said
Mr. Percy, “and the difference between
promising and performing.—You thought
me unjust yesterday, when I told you
that I feared you would prefer present
amusement to future happiness.”—
“Amusement!”—exclaimed Buckhurst,
turning suddenly towards Caroline,
“Do you imagine that is my object?”—then
approaching her, he said in
a low voice, “It is a natural mistake for
you to make, Miss Caroline Percy—for
you—who know nothing of love. Amusement!— 
It is not amusement that detains
me—Can you think I would stay for a
ball, unless I expected to meet you
there?”
“Then I will not go,” said Caroline,— 
“It would be coquetry to meet you
there, when, as I thought, I had distinctly
explained to you yesterday—”
“Oh! don't repeat that,” interrupted
Buckhurst, “a lady is never bound to
remember what she said yesterday—especially
if it were a cruel sentence; I

hope hereafter you will change your
mind—Let me live upon hope.”
“I never will give any false hopes,” 
said Caroline, “and since I cannot add to
your happiness, I will take care not to
diminish it. I will not be the cause of
your breaking your promise to my father:
I will not be the means of tempting
you to lower yourself in his opinion
—I will not go to this ball.”
Buckhurst smiled, went on with some
common-place raillery about cruelty, and
took his leave, fancying that Caroline
could not be in earnest in her threat, as
he called it.—As his disobedience would
have the excuse of love, he thought he
might venture to transgress the letter of
the promise.
When the time came he went to the
ball, almost certain that Caroline would
break her resolution, as he knew that she
had never yet been at a public assembly,
and it was natural that one so sure of
being admired would be anxious to be
seen.—His surprise and disappointment

were great when no Caroline appeared.
He asked Rosamond if her sister was
not well?
“Perfectly well”—
“Then why is not she here?”
“Don't you recollect her telling you
that she would not come?”
“Yes: but I did not think she was in
earnest.”
“How little you know of Caroline,” 
replied Rosamond, “if you imagine that
either in trifles, or in matters of consequence,
she would say one thing and do
another.”
“I feel,” said Buckhurst, coloring,
“what that emphasis on she means.
But I did not think you would have reproached
me so severely. I thought my
cousin Rosamond was my friend.”
“So I am—but not a friend to your
faults.”
“Surely it is no great crime in a
young man to like going to a ball better
than going to the Temple—But I am

really concerned,” continued Buckhurst,
“that I have deprived Miss Caroline
Percy of the pleasure of being here to
night. ... And this was to have been
her first appearance in public. ... I am
quite sorry.”
“Caroline is not at all impatient to appear
in public; and as to the pleasure of
being at a ball it costs her little to sacrifice
that, or any pleasure of her own, for
the advantage of others.”
“When Miss Caroline Percy said
something about my falling in her father's
opinion for such a trifle, I could not guess
that she was serious.”
“She does not,” replied Rosamond,
“think it a trifle to break a promise.”
Buckhurst looked at his watch—“The
mail-coach will pass through this town
in an hour. It shall take me to London
—Good bye—I will not stay another
moment—I am gone. I wish I had gone
yesterday—Pray, my dear, good Rosamond,
say so for me to Caroline”—

At this moment a beautiful young
lady, attended by a large party, entered
the ball-room—Buckhurst stopped to inquire
who she was.—
“Did you never see my sister before?” 
replied Colonel Hauton,—“Oh I must
introduce you, and you shall dance with
her.”
“You do me a great deal of honor ...
I shall be very happy ... that is, I
should be extremely happy ... only
unfortunately I am under a necessity of
setting off immediately for London. ...
I'm afraid I shall be late for the mail. ...
Good night.”
Buckhurst made an effort as he spoke,
to pass on, but Colonel Hauton, bursting
into one of his horse-laughs, held him
fast by the arm, swore he must be drunk,
for that he did not know what he was
saying or doing.
“Commissioner Falconer, who now
came up, whispered to Buckhurst, “Are
you mad?—You can't refuse ...
you'll affront for ever” ...

“I can't help it,” said Buckhurst,
—I'm sorry for it—I cannot help it.”— 
He still kept on his way towards the
door.
“But,” expostulated the Commissioner,
following him out,—“you can surely
stay—be introduced, and pay your compliments
to the young lady ... you are
time enough for the mail. Don't affront
people for nothing, who may be of the
greatest use to you.”
“But, my dear father, I don't want
people to be of use to me.”
“Well, at any rate turn back just to
see what a charming creature Miss Hauton
is!—Such an entrée—So much the
air of a woman of fashion!—Every eye
rivetted.—The whole room in admiration
of her!”—
“I did not see any thing remarkable
about her,” said Buckhurst, turning back
to look at her again,—“If you think I
should affront. ... I would not really
affront Hauton, who has always been so
civil to me. ... I'll go and be introduced

and pay my compliments, since
you say it is necessary—But I shall not
stay five minutes.”
Buckhurst returned to be introduced
to Miss Hauton. This young lady was
so beautiful that she would, in all probability,
have attracted general attention,
even if she had not been the sister of a
man of Colonel Hauton's fortune, and the
niece of a nobleman of Lord Oldborough's
poltical consequence; but undoubtedly
these circumstances much increased the
power of her charms over the imaginations
of her admirers. All the gentlemen
at this ball were unanimous in declaring
that she was a most fascinating
creature. Buckhurst Falconer and Godfrey
Percy were introduced to her nearly
at the same time.—Godfrey asked her to
dance—and Buckhurst could not help
staying to see how she danced—She
danced to gracefully, that while he
thought he had stayed only five minutes,
he delayed a quarter of an hour. Many
gentlemen were ambitious of the honor

of Miss Hauton's hand for the next two
dances. But to their disappointment
she declined dancing any more: and
though Buckhurst Falconer had determined
not to have stayed nor to dance
with her, yet an undefinable perverse
curiosity induced him to delay a few
minutes, to determine whether she conversed
as well as she danced. The sound
of her voice was sweet and soft, and
there was an air of languor in her whole
person and manner, with an apparent
indifference to general admiration, which
charmed Godfrey Percy, especially as
he perceived that she could be animated
by his conversation. To Buckhurst's
wit she listened with politeness, but obviously
without interest.—Buckhurst
looked at his watch again—but it was
now too late for the mail.—Rosamond
was surprised to see him still in the ballroom.—He
laid all the blame on his
father, and pleaded that he was detained
by parental orders which he could not
disobey.—He sat beside Rosamond at

supper, and used much eloquence to
convince her, that he had obeyed against
his will.
In the mean time Godfrey, seated next
to his fair partner, became every moment
more and more sensible of the advantages
of his situation. Towards the end of supper,
when the buz of general conversation
increased, it happened that somebody
near Miss Hauton spoke of a marriage
that was likely to take place in the
fashionable world, and all who thought
themselves, or who wished to be thought
good authorities, began to settle how it
would be, and when it would be: but a
gentleman of Godfrey's acquaintance,
who sat next to him, said, in a low voice,
“It will never be.”—“Why?” said Godfrey.—The
gentleman answered in a
whisper.
“There is an insuperable objection— 
The mother ... don't you recollect?
... the mother was a divorcée, and no
man of sense would venture to marry the
daughter—”

“No, certainly,” said Godfrey—“I
did not know the fact.”—
He turned, as he finished speaking, to
ask Miss Hauton if she would permit
him to help her to some thing that stood
before him, but to his surprise and alarm
he perceived that she was pale, trembling,
and scarcely able to support herself.—He,
for the first moment, thought
only that she was taken suddenly ill, and
he was going to call Lady Oldborough's
attention to her indisposition—but Miss
Hauton stopped him, and said in a low
tremulous voice—“Take no notice”— 
He then poured out a glass of water, put
it within her reach, turned away in obedience
to her wishes, and sat in such a
manner as to screen her from observation.
A confused recollection now came
across his mind of his having heard many
years ago, when he was a child, of the
divorce of some Lady Anne Hauton,
and the truth occurred to him, that this
was Miss Hauton's mother, and that Miss
Hauton had overheard the whisper.—

In a few moments, anxious to see
whether she had recovered, and yet afraid
to distress her by his attention, he half
turned his head, and looking down at
her plate, asked if she was better.—
“Quite well, thank you”—
He then raised his eyes, and looking
as unconcernedly as he could, resumed
his former attitude, and began some
trifling conversation, but whatever effort
he made to appear the same as before,
there was some constraint, or some difference
in his voice and manner, which
the young lady perceived—her voice immediately
changed and faltered—he
spoke quickly—both spoke at the same
time, without knowing what either said
or what they said themselves.—Their
eyes met, and both were silent.—Miss
Hauton blushed deeply. He saw that his
conjecture was right, and she saw, by
Godfrey's countenance, that her secret
was discovered,—her eyes fell—she grew
pale and instantly fainted. Lady Oldborough
came to her assistance, but she

was too helpless a fine lady to be of the
least use: she could only say that—“It
must be the heat of the room, and that
she should faint herself in another moment.”
Godfrey whispered to his mother—and
Miss Hauton was carried into the open
air. Lady Oldborough and her smelling
bottle followed. Godfrey, leaving the
young lady with them, returned quickly
to the supper-room, to prevent any one
from intruding upon her. He met Buckhurst
Falconer and Colonel Hauton at
the door, and stopped them with assurances,
that Miss Hauton had all the assistance
she could want.
“I'll tell you what she wants”—cried
the Colonel to Buckhurst—“a jaunt to
Cheltenham, which would do her, and me
too, a d&wblank;d deal of good—for now the
races are over, what the devil shall we do
with ourselves here. I'll rattle Maria off
the day after to morrow in my phaeton.
No—Buckhurst, my good fellow, I'll
drive you in the phaeton, and I'll make

Lady Oldborough take Maria in the
coach.”
Godfrey Percy, who, as he passed,
could not avoid hearing this invitation,
did not stay to learn Buckhurst's answer,
but went instantly into the room. No
one, not even the gentleman whose whisper
had occasioned it, had the least suspicion
of the real cause of Miss Hauton's
indisposition. Lady Oldborough had assigned
as the occasion of the young lady's
illness “the heat of the room,” and
an old medical dowager was eager to establish
that “it was owing to some strawberry
ice, as to her certain knowledge
ice, in some shape or other, was the
cause of most of the mischief in the
world.”
Whilst the partisans of heat and ice
were still battling, and whilst the dancers
had quite forgotten Miss Hauton, and
every thin, but themselves, the young
lady returned to the room.—Godfrey
went to order Mrs. Percy's carriage, and
the Percy family left the ball.

When Godfrey found himself in the
carriage with his own family, he began
eagerly to talk of Miss Hauton; he was
anxious to know what all and each
thought of her, in general, and in particular,
he talked so much of her, and
seemed so much surprised that any body
could wish to talk or think of any thing
else, that Mrs. Percy could not help
smiling. Mr. Percy, leaning back in
the carriage, said that he felt inclined to
sleep.
“To sleep!”—repeated Godfrey—“Is
it possible that you can be sleepy, Sir?”
“Very possible, my dear son—it is
past four o'clock I believe.”
Godfrey was silent for some minutes,
and he began to think over every word
and look that had passed between him
and Miss Hauton. He had been only
amused with her conversation, and
charmed by her grace and beauty in the
beginning of the evening, but the sensibility
she had afterwards shown had
touched him so much, that he was extremely

anxious to interest his father in
her favor. He explained the cause of her
fainting, and asked whether she was not
much to be pitied.—All pitied her—and
Godfrey, encouraged by this pity, went on
to prove that she ought not to be blamed
for her mother's faults, that nothing
could be more unjust and cruel than to
think ill of the innocent daughter, because
her mother had been imprudent.
“But, Godfrey”—said Rosamond— 
“you seem to be answering some one
who has attacked Miss Hauton—who
are you contending with?”
“With himself”—said Mr. Percy— 
“don't you see that he is contending
with himself? His prudence tells him,
that the gentleman was quite right in
saying that no man of sense would marry
the daughter of a woman, who had
conducted herself ill, and yet he wishes
to make an exception to the general rule,
in favor of pretty Miss Hauton.”
“Pretty! my dear father, she is a
great deal more than pretty: if she were

only pretty I should not be so much interested
about her. But putting her quite
out of the question, I do not agree with
the general principle that a man should
not marry the daughter of a woman who
has conducted herself ill.”
“I think you did agree with it till you
knew that it applied to Miss Hauton's
case”—said Mr. Percy—“as well as I remember,
Godfrey, I heard you once answer
on a similar occasion! No, no—I
will have nothing to do with any of the
daughters of that mother—black cats
have black kittens—or black dogs have
black puppies, I forget which, you said.”
“Whichever it was, I am ashamed of
having quoted such a vulgar proverb”— 
said Godfrey.
“It may be a vulgar proverb, but I
doubt whether it be a vulgar error”—said
Mr. Percy, “I have great faith in the
wisdom of nations. So much so in the present
instance, that I own I would rather
a son of mine were to marry a well-conducted
farmer's daughter of honest parentage,

than the daughter of an ill-conducted
lady of rank or fashion. The farmer's
daughter might be trained into a
gentlewoman, and might make my son at
least a faithful wife, which is more than
he could expect, or than I should expect,
from the young lady, who had early seen
the example of what was bad, and whose
predispositions would be provided with
the excuse of the old song.”
Godfrey took fire at this, and exclaimed
against the injustice of a doctrine,
which would render wretched for life
many young women, who might possess
every amiable and estimable quality, and
who could never remedy the misfortune
of their birth. Godfrey urged, that whilst
this would render the good miserable, it
would be the most probable means of
driving the weak from despair into vice.
Rosamond eagerly joined her brother's
side of the question—Mr. Percy besought
a patient hearing from his children,
though he knew, he said, “that
he must appear one of the ‘fathers with

flinty hearts.”’—He protested, that he
felt great compassion for the unfortunate
individuals, as much as a man, who was
not in love with any of them, could reasonably
be expected to feel.
“But now”—continued Mr. Percy— 
“granting that all the consequences,
which Godfrey has predicted, were to follow
from my doctrine, yet I am inclined
to believe, that society would upon the
whole be the gainer by such severity, or,
as I am willing to allow it to be, such apparent
injustice. The adherence to this
principle would be the misery, perhaps
the ruin, of a few, but would I think
tend to the safety and happiness of so many,
that the evil would be nothing in
comparison to the good. The certainty
of shame descending to the daughters
would be a powerful means of deterring
mothers from ill conduct; and might
probably operate more effectually to restrain
licentiousness in high life than
heavy damages, or the now transient disgrace
of public trial and divorce. As to

the apparent injustice of punishing children
for the faults of their parents, it
should be considered, that in most other
cases children suffer discredit more or less
for the faults of their parents of whatever
kind; and that, on the other hand, they
enjoy the advantage of the good characters
which their parents establish. This
must be so from the necessary effect of
experience, and from the nature of human
belief, except in cases where passion
operates to destroy or suspend the power
of reason. ...”
“That is not my case, I assure you,
Sir”—interrupted Godfrey.
Mr. Percy smiled and continued:— 
“It appears to me highly advantageous,
that character, in general, should descend
to posterity as well as riches or honors,
which are, in fact, often the representations,
or consequences, in other forms, of
different parts of character, industry— 
talents—courage.—For instance, in the
lower ranks of life it is a common saying,
that a good name is the richest legacy a

woman can leave her daughter. This idea
should be impressed more fully than it is
upon the higher classes. At present
money too frequently forms a compensation
for every thing in high life. It is not
uncommon to see the natural daughters
of men of rank, or of large fortune, portioned
so magnificently, either with solid
gold, or promised family protection, that
their origin by the mother's side, and the
character of the mother, are quite forgotten.
Can this be advantageous to good
morals? Surely a mother living in open
defiance of the virtue of her sex should
not see her illegitimate offspring instead
of being her shame become her glory.— 
On the contrary, nothing could tend
more to prevent the ill conduct of women
in high life, than the certainty that
men who, from their fortune, birth, and
character, might be deemed the most desirable
matches, would shun alliances with
the daughters of women of tainted reputation.”—
Godfrey eagerly declared his contempt

for those men, who married, for money or
ambition, either illegitimate or legitimate
daughters. “He should be sorry”—he
said—“to do any thing that would countenance
vice, which ought to be put out
of countenance by all means—if possible.
But he was not the guardian of public
morals; and even if he were, he should
still think it unjust, that the innocent
should suffer for the guilty. That for his
own part, if he could put his father's disapprobation
out of the question, he should
easily settle his mind, and overcome all
objections in a prudential point of view
to marrying an amiable woman, who had
had the misfortune to have a worthless
mother.
Mrs. Percy had not yet given her opinion
—all eyes turned towards her. As
usual, she spoke with persuasive gentleness
and good sense; she marked where
each had, in the warmth of argument,
said more than they intended, and she
seized the just medium by which all might
be conciliated. She said that she thought

the important point to be considered was,
what the education of the daughter had
been; on this a prudent man would form
his opinion, not on the mere accident of
her birth. He would inquire whether
the girl had lived with the ill-conducted
mother—had been in situations to be influenced
by her example, or by that of
the company which she kept. If such
had been the case, Mrs. Percy declared
she thought it would be imprudent and
wrong to marry the daughter.—But if the
daughter had been separated in early
childhood from the mother, had never
been exposed to the influence of her example,
had, on the contrary, been educated
carefully in strict moral and religious
principles, it would be cruel, because
unnecessary, to object to an alliance
with such a woman.—The objection
would appear inconsistent, as well as unjust,
if made by those who professed to
believe in the unlimited power of education.
Godfrey rubbed his hands with delight

—Mr. Percy smiled, and acknowledged
that he was compelled to admit the truth
and justice of this statement.
“Pray do you know, Godfrey,” said
Rosamond, “whether Miss Hauton
lived with her mother, or was educated
by her?”
“I cannot tell,” said Godfrey, “but
I will make it my business to find out.— 
At all events, my dear Madam,” continued
he, “a child cannot decide by
whom she will be educated. It is not
her fault if her childhood be passed with
a mother who is no fit guardian for
her.”
“I acknowledge,” said Mrs. Percy,
“that is her misfortune.”
“And would you make it an irreparable
misfortune,” said Godfrey in an
expostulatory tone—“my dear mother
... only consider.”
“My dear son, I do consider”—said
Mrs. Percy—“but I cannot give up the
point of education. I should be very
sorry to see a son of mine married to a

woman, who had been in this unfortunate
predicament.—But”—added Mrs. Percy,
after a few minutes' silence—“if from the
time her own will and judgment could be
supposed to act, she had chosen for her
companions respectable and amiable persons,
and had conducted herself with uniform
propriety and discretion, I think I
might be brought to allow of an exception
to my general principle?”—She
looked at Mr. Percy.—
“Undoubtedly”—said Mr. Percy— 
“exceptions must not merely be allowed,
but will force themselves in favor of superior
merit, of extraordinary excellence,
which will rise above every unfavorable
circumstance in any class, in any condition
of life in which it may exist, which
will throw off any stigma, however disgraceful,
counteract all prepossession,
however potent, rise against all power of
depression, redeem a family, redeem a
race.”
“Now, father, you speak like yourself” 
—cried Godfrey—“this is all I ask,
all I wish.”—

“And here”—continued Mr. Percy— 
“is an adequate motive for a good and
great mind—yes great—for I believe there
are great minds in the female as well as
in the male part of the creation—I say,
here is an adequate motive to excite a
woman of a good and great mind to exert
herself to struggle against the misfortunes
of her birth.”
“For instance,” said Rosamond, “my
sister Caroline is just the kind of woman,
who, if she had been one of these unfortunate
daughters, would have made herself
an exception.”
“Very likely,” said Mr. Percy, laughing,
“but why you should go so far out
of your way to make an unfortunate
daughter of poor Caroline, and why you
should picture to yourself, as Dr. Johnson
would say, what would be probable
in an impossible situation, I cannot conceive,
except for the pleasure of exercising,
as you do upon most occasions, a
fine romantic imagination.”
“At all events I am perfectly satisfied,

said Godfrey. “Since you admit of
exceptions, Sir, I agree with you entirely.”
“No, not entirely. I am sure you
cannot agree with me entirely, until I
admit Miss Hauton to be one of my exceptions.”
“That will come in time, if she deserve
it,” said Mrs. Percy.
Godfrey thanked his mother with
great warmth, and observed, “that
she was always the most indulgent of
friends.”
“But remember my if,” said Mrs.
Percy, “I know nothing of Miss Hauton
at present, except that she is very
pretty, and, that she has engaging manners.
—Do you, my dear Godfrey?”
“Yes, indeed, Ma'am, I know a great
deal more of her.”
“Did you ever see her before this
night?”
“Never,” said Godfrey.—
“And at a ball!” said Mrs. Percy,
you must have wonderful penetration

into character.—But Cupid, though
blindfold, can see more at a single
glance, than a philosophic eye can discover
with the most minute examination.”
“But Cupid out of the question, let
me ask you, mother,” said Godfrey,
“whether you do not think Miss Hauton
has a great deal of sensibility.— 
You saw that there was no affectation in
her fainting.”—
“None, none,” said Mrs. Percy.
“There, father!” cried Godfrey, in
an exulting tone; “and sensibility is
the foundation of every thing that is
most amiable and charming, of every
grace, of every virtue in woman.”
“Yes,”—said Mr. Percy, “and
perhaps of some of their errors and
vices. It depends upon how it is governed,
whether sensibility be a curse
or a blessing to it's possessor, and to
society.”
“A curse!” cried Godfrey,—“yes,
if a woman be doomed. ...

“Come, come, my dear Godfrey,”— 
interrupted Mr. Percy, “do not let us
talk any more upon the subject just now,
because you are too much interested to
reason coolly.”
Rosamond then took her turn to talk
of what was uppermost in her thoughts.
—Buckhurst Falconer, whom she alternately
blamed and pitied, accused and
defended—Sometimes rejoicing that Caroline
had rejected his suit, sometimes
pitying him for his disappointment, and
repeating that with such talents, frankness,
and generosity of disposition, it
was much to be regretted that he had
not that rectitude of principle, and
steadiness of character, which alone
could render him worthy of Caroline.
Then passing from compassion for the
son, to indignation against the father,
she observed, “that Commissioner Falconer
seemed determined to counteract
all that was good in his son's disposition,
that he actually did every thing in his
power, to encourage Buckhurst in a

taste for dissipation as it seemed, on
purpose to keep him in a state of dependance,
and to enslave him to the
great.”
“I hope, with all my heart, I hope,” 
continued Rosamond, “that Buckhurst
will have sense and steadiness enough
to refuse, but I heard his father supporting
that foolish Colonel Hauton's
persuasions, and urging his poor son to
go with those people to Cheltenham.— 
Now, if once he gets into that extravagant,
dissipated set, he will be ruined
for ever,—Adieu to all hopes of him.— 
He will no more go to the bar than I shall
—he will think of nothing but pleasure; 
he will run in debt again, and then
farewell principle, and with principle,
farewell all hopes of him.—But I think
he will have sense and steadiness enough
to resist his father, and to refuse to accompany
this profligate patron, Colonel
Hauton.—Godfrey, what is your opinion?
Do you think Buckhurst will
go?”

“I do not know,” replied Godfrey— 
“in his place I should find it very easy,
but in my own case, I confess, I should
feel it difficult to refuse, if I were pressed
to join a party of pleasure with Miss
Hauton.”