



Dear Father and Mother,
I thank you a thousand times for your
Goodness to me, express'd in your last Letter. 
I now long to get my Business done, and
come to my new-old Lot again, as I may call it. 
I have been quite another thing since my Master
has turn'd me away; and as I shall come to
you an honest Daughter, what Pleasure it is to
what I should have had, if I could not have
seen you but as a guilty one! Well, my
Writing time will soon be over, and so I will 

make use of it now, and tell you all that has
happened since my last Letter. 
I wonder'd Mrs. Jervis did not call me
to sup with her, and fear'd she was angry; 
and when I had finish'd my Letter, I long'd for
her coming to Bed. At last she came up, but
seem'd shy and reserv'd; and I said, My dear
Mrs. Jervis, I am glad to see you: You are
not angry with me, I hope. She said she was
sorry Things had gone so far; and that she had
a great deal of Talk with my Master, after I
was gone; that he seem'd mov'd at what I said,
and at my falling on my Knees to him, and my
Prayer for him, at my going away. He said, I
was a strange Girl; he knew not what to make
of me: And is she gone? said he: I intended
to say something else to her, but she behav'd
so oddly, that I had not Power to stop her. 
She ask'd, If she should call me again? He said,
Yes; and then, No, let her go; it is best for
her and me too; and she shall go, now I have
given her Warning. Where she had it, I
can't tell; but I never met with the Fellow of
her in my Life, at any Age. She said, he had
order'd her not to tell me all: But she believ'd
he never would offer any thing to me again,
and I might stay, she fansy'd, if I would beg it
as a Favour; tho' she was not sure neither. 
I stay! dear Mrs. Jervis, said I; why 'tis
the best News that could have come to me,
that he will let me go. I do nothing but long
to go back again to my Poverty and Distress,
as he threaten'd I should; for tho' I am sure of 

the Poverty, I shall not have half the Distress
I have had for some Months past, I'll assure
you. 
Mrs. Jervis, dear good Soul! wept over
me, and said, Well, well, Pamela, I did not
think I had shew'd so little Love to you, as
that you should express so much Joy upon
leaving me. I am sure I never had a Child half
so dear to me as you are. 
I wept to hear her so good to me, as indeed
she has always been; and said, What
would you have me to do, dear Mrs. Jervis? 
I love you next to my own Father and Mother,
and to leave you is the chief Concern I have at
quitting this Place; but I know it will be certain
Ruin if I stay. After such Offers, and such
Threatenings, and his comparing himself to a
wicked Ravisher, in the very Time of his last
Offer; and turning it into a Jest, that we should
make a pretty Story in Romance; can I stay,
and be safe? Has he not demean'd himself
twice? And it behoves me to beware of the
third time, for fear he should lay his Snares
surer; for may-hap he did not expect a poor
Servant would resist her Master so much. And
must it not be look'd upon as a sort of Warrant
for such Actions, if I stay after this? For
I think, when one of our Sex finds she is attempted,
it is an Encouragement to the Attempter
to proceed, if one puts one's self in the
Way of it, when one can help it; 'tis neither
more nor less than inviting him to think,
that one forgives what, in short, ought not to 

be forgiven: Which is no small Countenance
to foul Actions, I'll assure you. 
She hugg'd me to her, and said, I'll assure
you! Pretty-face, where gottest thou all thy
Knowledge, and thy good Notions, at these
Years? Thou art a Miracle for thy Age, and I
shall always love thee. —But, do you resolve
to leave us, Pamela? 
Yes, my dear Mrs. Jervis, said I; for as
Matters stand, how can I do otherwise? — 
But I'll finish the Duties of my Place first, if I
may; and hope you'll give me a Character, as
to my Honesty, that it may not be thought I
was turn'd away for any Harm. Ay, that I
will, said she; I will give thee such a Character
as never Girl at thy Years deserv'd. And, I am
sure, said I, I will always love and honour you,
as my third best Friend, where-ever I go, or
whatever becomes of me. 
And so we went to Bed, and I never wak'd
till 'twas time to rise; which I did, as blythe as
a Bird, and went about my Business with Pleasure. 
But I believe my Master is fearfully angry
with me; for he pass'd by me two or three
times, and would not speak to me; and towards
Evening he met me in the Passage going
into the Garden, and said such a Word to
me as I never heard in my Life from him, to
Man, Woman or Child; for he first said, This
Creature's always in my Way, I think. I said,
standing up as close as I could, (and the Entry
was wide enough for a Coach too) I hope I 

shan't be long in your Honour's Way. D&wblank;n
you! said he, (that was the hard Word) for a
little Witch; I have no Patience with you. 
I profess, I trembled to hear him say so; 
but I saw he was vex'd; and as I am going
away, I minded it the less. Well! I see, my
dear Parents, that when a Person will do wicked
Things, it is no Wonder he will speak wicked
Words. May God keep out of the Way of
them both, 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

