



My dear Father and Mother,
I did not rise till Ten o'Clock, and I had all
the Concerns and Wishes of the Family, and
Multitudes of Inquiries about me. My wicked
Master went out early to hunt; but left Word,
he would be in to Breakfast. And so he was. 
He came up to our Chamber about Eleven,
and had nothing to do to be sorry; for he was
our Master, and so put on sharp Anger at first. 
I had great Emotions at his entering the
Room, and threw my Apron over my Head,
and fell a crying, as if my Heart would break. 
Mrs. Jervis, said he, since I know you,
and you me so well, I don't know how we
shall live together for the future. Sir, said 

she, I will take the Liberty to say what I think
is best for both. I have so much Grief, that
you should attempt to do any Injury to this
poor Girl, and especially in my Chamber, that
I should think myself accessary to the Mischief,
if I was not to take Notice of it. Tho' my
Ruin therefore may depend upon it, I desire
not to stay; but pray let poor Pamela and me
go together. With all my Heart, said he; and
the sooner, the better. She fell a crying. I
find, says he, this Girl has made a Party of
the whole House in her Favour against me. 
Her Innocence deserves it of us all, said she very
kindly: And I never could have thought, that
the Son of my dear good Lady departed, could
have so forfeited his Honour, as to endeavour to
destroy a Virtue he ought to protect. No more
of this, Mrs. Jervis, said he; I will not bear
it. As for Pamela, she has a lucky Knack of
falling into Fits, when she pleases. But the
cursed Yellings of you both made me not
myself. I intended no Harm to her, as I told
you both, if you'd have left your Squallings; 
and I did no Harm neither, but to myself; for
I rais'd a Hornets Nest about my Ears, that, as
far as I know, may have stung to Death my
Reputation. Sir, said Mrs. Jervis, then I beg
Mr. Longman may take my Accounts, and I
will go away as soon as I can. As for Pamela,
she is at her Liberty, I hope, to go away next
Thursday, as she intends? 
I sat still; for I could not speak, nor look
up, and his Presence discompos'd me extremely; 

but I was sorry to hear myself the unhappy
Occasion of Mrs. Jervis's losing her Place, and
hope that may be still made up. 
Well, said he, let Mr. Longman make up
your Accounts, as soon as you will; and Mrs.
Jewkes (who is his House-keeper in Lincolnshire)
shall come hither in your Place, and won't
be less obliging, I dare say, than you have been. 
Said she, I have never disoblig'd you till now; 
and let me tell you, Sir, if you knew what belong'd
to your own Reputation or Honour— 
No more, no more, said he, of these antiquated
Topicks. I have been no bad Friend to
you; and I shall always esteem you, tho' you
have not been so faithful to my Secrets, as I
could have wish'd, and have laid me open to
this Girl, which has made her more afraid of
me than she had Occasion. Well, Sir, said
she, after what pass'd Yesterday, and last Night,
I think I went rather too far in Favour of your
Injunctions, than otherwise; and I should have
deserv'd every body's Censure, as the basest of
Creatures, had I been capable of contributing
to your lawless Attempts. Still, Mrs. Jervis,
still reflecting upon me, and all for imaginary
Faults! for what Harm have I done the Girl? — 
I won't bear it, I'll assure you. But yet, in
Respect to my Mother, I am willing to part
friendly with you: Tho' you ought both of you
to reflect on the Freedom of your Conversation,
in relation to me; which I should have resented
more than I do, but that I am conscious I had
no Business to demean myself so as to be in 

your Closet, where I might have expected to
hear a Multitude of Impertinence between
you. 
Well, Sir, said she, you have no Objection,
I hope, to Pamela's going away on
Thursday next? You are mighty solicitous, said
he, about Pamela: But, no, not I; let her
go as soon as she will: She is a naughty Girl,
and has brought all this upon herself; and upon
me more Trouble than she can have had from
me: But I have overcome it all, and will never
concern myself about her. 
I have a Proposal made me, added he,
since I have been out this Morning, that I shall
go near to embrace; and so wish only, that a
discreet Use may be made of what is past; and
there's an End of every thing with me, as to
Pamela, I'll assure you. 
I clasp'd my Hands together thro' my
Apron, overjoy'd at this, tho' I was soon to go
away: For, naughty as he has been to me, I
wish his Prosperity with all my Heart, for my
good old Lady's sake. 
Well, Pamela, said he, you need not
now be afraid to speak to me; tell me what
you lifted up your Hands at? I said not a Word. 
Says he, if you like what I have said, give me
your Hand upon it. I held my Hand up thro'
my Apron; for I could not speak to him; and
he took hold of it, and pressed it, tho' less
hard than he did my Arm the Day before. 
What does the little Fool cover her Face for?
said he: Pull your Apron away; and let me see 

how you look, after your Freedom of Speech
of me last Night. No wonder you're asham'd
to see me. You know you were very free with
my Character. 
I could not stand this barbarous Insult, as
I took it to be, considering his Behaviour to
me; and I then spoke and said, O the Difference
between the Minds of thy Creatures, good
God! How shall some be cast down in their
Innocence, while others can triumph in their
Guilt! 
And so saying, I went up-stairs to my Chamber,
and wrote all this; for tho' he vex'd me
at his Taunting, yet I was pleas'd to hear he
was likely to be marry'd, and that his wicked
Intentions were so happily overcome as to me; 
and this made me a little easier. And I hope I
have pass'd the worst; or else it is very hard. 
And yet I shan't think myself at Ease quite, till
I am with you: For, methinks, after all, his
Repentance and Amendment are mighty suddenly
resolv'd upon. But the Divine Grace is
not confin'd to Space; and Remorse may, and
I hope has smitten him to the Heart at once,
for his Injuries to poor me! Yet I won't be too
secure neither. 
Having Opportunity, I send now what I
know will grieve you to the Heart. But I hope
I shall bring my next Scribble myself; and so
conclude, tho' half broken-hearted, 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter. 

