



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morning (April 9.). 
I have your three Letters. Never was there a
creature more impatient on the most interesting
uncertainty that I was, to know the event of the Interview
between you and Solmes. 
It behoves me to account to my dear friend, in
her present unhappy situation, for every-thing that
may have the least appearance of negligence or remissness
on my part. I sent Robin in the morning early,
in hopes of a deposit. He loitered about the place
till near Ten to no purpose; and then came away; 
my Mother having given him a Letter to carry to
Mr. Hunt's, which he was to deliver before Three,
when only, in the day-time, that gentleman is at 

home; and to bring her back an Answer to it. Mr.
Hunt's house, you know, lies wide from Harlowe-Place. 
Robin but just saved his time; and returned
not till it was too late to send him again. I
could only direct him to set out before day this morning; 
and, if he got any Letter, to ride as for his life
to bring it to me. 
I lay by myself: A most uneasy night I had thro'
impatience; and being discomposed with it, lay longer
than usual. Just as I was risen, in came Kitty, from
Robin, with your three Letters. I was not a quarter
dressed; and only slipt on my morning Sac; proceeding
no further till I had read them all thro', long as
they are: And yet I often stopped to rave aloud
(tho' by myself) at the devilish people you have to
deal with. 
How my heart rises at them all! How poorly did
they design to trick you into an encouragement of
Solmes, from the extorted Interview! —I am very,
very angry at your Aunt Hervey—To give up her
own judgment so tamely! —And, not content to do
so, to become such an active instrument in their
hands! —But it is so like the world! —So like my
Mother too! —Next to her own child, there is not
any-body living she values so much as she does you: — 
Yet, it is—Why should we embroil ourselves, Nancy,
with the affairs of other people? 
Other people! —How I hate the poor words, where
friendship is concerned, and where the protection to
be given may be of so much consequence to a friend,
and of so little detriment to one's self! 
I am delighted with your spirit, however. I expected
it not from you. Nor did They, I am sure. 
Nor would you, perhaps, have exerted it, if Lovelace's
intelligence of Solme's Nursery-offices had not
set you up. I wonder not that the wretch is said to
love you the better for it. What an honour would it be
to him to have such a Wife? And he can be even with 

you when you are so. He must indeed be a savage,
as you say. —Yet is he less to blame for his perseverance,
than those of your own family, whom most
you reverence, for theirs. 
It is well, as I have often said, that I have not such
provocations and trials; I should perhaps long ago
have taken your Cousin Dolly's advice—Yet dare I
not to touch that key. —I shall always love the good
girl for her tenderness to you. 
I know not what to say to Lovelace; nor what to
think of his promises, nor of his proposals to you. 
'Tis certain that you are highly esteemed by all his
family. The Ladies are persons of unblemished honour. 
My Lord M. is also (as Men and Peers go)
a man of honour. I could tell what to advise any
other person in the world to do but you. So much
expected from you! —Such a shining light! —Your
quitting your Father's house, and throwing yourself
into the protection of a family, however honourable,
that has a man in it, whose person, parts, declarations,
and pretensions, will be thought to have engaged
your warmest esteem;—Methinks I am rather
for advising that you should get privately to London; 
and not to let either him, or any-body else but
me, know where you are, till your Cousin Morden
comes. 
As to going to your Uncle's, that you must not do
if you can help it. Nor must you have Solmes, that's
certain: Not only because of his unworthiness in
every respect, but because of the aversion you have
so openly avowed to him; which every-body knows
and talks of; as they do of your approbation of the
other. For your reputation sake therefore, as well
as to prevent mischief, you must either live single, or
have Lovelace. 
If you think of going to London, let me know; 
and I hope you will have time to allow me a further 

concert as to the manner of your getting away, and
thither, and how to procure proper lodgings for you. 
To obtain this time, you must palliate a little, and
come into some seeming compromise, if you cannot
do otherwise. Driven as you are driven, it will be
strange if you are not obliged to part with a few of
your admirable punctilio's. 
You will observe from what I have written, that I
have not succeeded with my Mother. 
I am extremely mortified and disappointed. We
have had very strong debates upon it. But, besides
the narrow argument of embroiling ourselves with other
peoples affairs, as above-mentioned, she will have it,
that it is your duty to comply. She says, she was
always of opinion that Daughters should implicitly
submit to the will of their Parents in the great article
of Marriage; and that she governed herself accordingly
in marrying my Father; who at first was more
the choice of her Parents than her own. 
This is what she argues in behalf of her favourite
Hickman, as well as for Solmes in your case. 
I must not doubt, but my Mother always governed
herself by this principle—because she says she did. I
have likewise another reason to believe it; which you
shall have, tho' it may not become me to give it— 
That they did not live so very happily together, as
one would hope people might do who married preferring
each other at the time, to the rest of the world. 
Somebody shall fare never the better for this double-meant
policy of my Mother, I do assure you. Such
a retrospection in her arguments to him, and to his
address, it is but fit that he should suffer for my mortification
in failing to carry a point upon which I had
set my whole heart. 
Think, my dear, if in any way I can serve you. 
If you allow of it, I protest I will go off privately
with you, and we will live and die together. Think
of it. Improve upon my hint, and command me. 

A little interruption. —What is breakfast to the
subject I am upon? 
* *
London, I am told, is the best hiding-place in the
world. I have written nothing but what I will stand
to at the word of command. Women love to engage
in knight-errantry, now-and-then, as well as to encourage
it in the men. But in your case, what I propose,
will not seem to have any-thing of that nature
in it. It will enable me to perform what is no more
than a duty in serving and comforting a dear and
worthy friend, who labours under undeserved oppression: 
And you will ennoble, as I may say, your
Anna Howe, if you allow her to be your companion
in affliction. 
I will engage, my dear, we shall not be in town
together one month, before we surmount all difficulties; 
and This without being beholden to any men-fellows
for their protection. 
I must repeat what I have often said, That the authors
of your persecutions would not have presumed
to set on foot their selfish schemes against you, had
they not depended upon the gentleness of your spirit: 
Tho' now, having gone so far, and having engaged
Old Authority in it [Chide me, if you will!] neither
he nor they know how to recede. 
When they find you out of their reach, and know
that I am with you, you'll see how they'll pull in
their odious horns. 
I think, however, that you should have written to
your Cousin Morden the moment they had begun to
treat you disgracefully. 
I shall be impatient to hear whether they will attempt
to carry you to your Uncle's. I remember,
that Lord M's dismissed Bailiff reported of Lovelace,
that he had six or seven companions as bad as himself; 
and that the country was always glad when they
left it (a) . He actually has, as I hear, such a knot 

of them about him now. And, depend upon it, he
will not suffer them quietly to carry you to your Uncle's: 
And whose must you be, if he succeeds in
taking you from them? 
I tremble for you but upon supposing what may be
the consequence of a conflict upon this occasion. Lovelace
owes some of them vengeance. This gives me
a double concern, that my Mother should refuse her
consent to the protection I had set my heart upon procuring
for you. 
My Mother will not breakfast without me. A
quarrel has its conveniencies sometimes. Yet too
much Love, I think, is as bad as too little. 
* *
We have just now had another pull. Upon my
word, she is excessively—What shall I say? —unpersuadeable
—I must let her off with that soft word. 
Who was the old Greek, that said, He governed
Athens; his Wife, him; and his Son, her? 
It was not my Mother's fault [I am writing to you,
you know] that she did not govern my Father. But
I am but a Daughter! —Yet I thought I was not
quite so powerless when I was set upon carrying a
point, as I find myself to be. 
Adieu, my dear! —Happier times must come—And
that quickly too. —The strings cannot long continue
thus overstrained. They must break, or be relaxed. 
In either way, the Certainty must be preferable to
the Suspense. 
One word more! 
I think in my conscience you must take one of
these two alternatives; either To consent to let us go
to London together privately [In which case, I will
procure a vehicle, and meet you at your appointment
at the Stile to which Lovelace proposes to bring his
Uncle's chariot]; or, To put yourself into the protection
of Lord M. and the Ladies of his family. 
You have another, indeed; and that is, if you are 

absolutely resolved against Solmes, to meet and marry
Lovelace directly. 
Which-soever of these you make choice of, you
will have This plea, both to yourself, and to the world,
that you are concluded by the same uniform principle
that has governed your whole conduct, ever since
the contention between Lovelace and your Brother
has been on foot: That is to say, that you have chosen
a lesser evil, in hope to prevent a greater. 
Adieu! and Heaven direct for the best my beloved
creature, prays 
Her
Anna Howe. 