



My dearest Lady,
A thousand Thanks for your kind, your truly
Sisterly Letter and Advice. Mr. B. is just returned
from a Tour to Portsmouth, with the Countess,
I believe, but am not sure. 
Here I am forced to leave off. 
Let me scratch thro' this last Surmise. It seems,
she was not with him. This is some Comfort,
however. 
He is very kind; and Billy not being well, when
he came in, my Grief passed off without Blame. 
He has said a great many tender Things to me:
But added, That if I gave myself so much Uneasiness
every Time the Child ailed any thing, he would
hire the Nurse to over-lay him. Bless me, Madam!
what hard-hearted, what shocking Things are these
Men capable of saying! —The farthest from their
Hearts, indeed; so they had need. —For he was
as glad of the Child's being better as I could be. 
In the Morning he went out in the Chariot for
about an Hour, and returned in a very good Humour, 

saying Twenty agreeable Things to me, which
makes me so proud, and so pleas'd! 
He is gone out again. 
Could I but find this Matter happily conquer'd,
for his own Soul's sake! —But he seems, by what
your Ladyship mentions, to have carry'd this Polygamy
Point with the Lady. 
Can I live with him, Madam—Ought I— 
if this be the Case? I have it under his Hand, that
the Laws of his Country were sufficient to deter
him from this Practice. But, oh! he knew not
this Countess then! 
But here I must break off. 
He is returned, and coming up. Go into my
Bosom, for the present, O Letter dedicated to dear
Lady Davers—Come to my Hand, the Play
Imployment, so unsuited to my present afflicted
Mind! —Here he comes! 
O but, Madam, Madam! my Heart is almost
broken! —Just now Mr. B. tells me, that the
Countess Dowager, and the Viscountess her Sister,
are to be here to see my Billy, and to drink Tea
with me, this very Afternoon! 
I was all Confusion, when he told me this. I
looked around and around, and upon every thing
but him. 
Will not my Friends be welcome, Pamela?
said he, sternly. 
O yes, Sir, very welcome! —But I have
these nasty Vapours so, that I wish I might be excus'd
—I wish I might be allow'd to take an Airing
in the Chariot for two or three Hours; for I shall 

not be fit to be seen by such—Ladies—said I,
half out of Breath. 
You'll be fit to be seen by nobody, my Dear,
if you go on thus. —But, do as you please. 
He was going, and I took his Hand: Stay, dear
Sir, let me know what you would have me do. If
you would have me stay, I will. 
To be sure I would. 
Well, Sir, then I will. For it is hard, thought
I, if an innocent Person cannot look up, in her
own House too, as it is at present, as I may say, to
a guilty one! —Guilty in her Heart, at least!— 
Tho', poor Lady, I hope she is not so in Fact; and,
if God hears my Prayers, never will, for all Three
of our sakes. 
But, Madam, think for me what a Task I
have! How my Heart throbs in my Bosom! How
I tremble! How I struggle with myself! What
Rules I form for my Behaviour to this naughty Lady! 
How they are dash'd in Pieces as soon as formed,
and new ones taken up! And yet I doubt myself,
when I come to the Test. 
But one thing will help me. I pity the poor
Lady; and as she comes with the Heart of a Robber,
to invade me in my lawful Right, I pride myself
in a Superiority over this Countess; and will endeavour
to shew her the Country Girl in a Light
which would as well become her to appear in. 
I must be forced to leave off here; for Mr. B.
is just come in to receive his Guests; and I am in
a sad Flutter upon it. All my Resolution fails me:
What shall I do? —O that this Countess was
come, and gone! —I tremble so, that I shall 

behave like a Guilty one before the Guilty, who
will enjoy their Minds, I'll warrant, as if they
were innocent! —Why should that be? —But,
surely, if all was had, as this Turner has said, they
could not act thus barbarously by me! For I have
not deserved to be given up to be insulted! I hope
I have not! —For what have I done? 
I have one Comfort, however, in the midst of
all my Griefs; and that is in your Ladyship's Goodness; 
which gives me Leave to assume the honoured
Title, that, let what will happen, will always
give me equal Pride and Pleasure, in subscribing
myself 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister,
and humble Servant,
P. B. 

