



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

M. Hall, Friday, July 21. 
Just returned from an interview with this Hickman: 
A precise fop of a fellow, as starched as his
Ruffles. 
Thou knowest I love him not, Jack; and whom
we love not, we cannot allow a merit to; perhaps
not the merit they should be granted. However, I am
in earnest, when I say, that he seems to me to be so
set, so prim, so affected, so mincing, yet so clouterly
in his person, that I dare engage for thy opinion, if
thou dost justice to him, and to thyself, that thou
never beheldest such another, except in a pier-glass. 
I'll tell thee how I plaid him off. 
He came in his own chariot to Dormer's; and we
took a turn in the garden, at his request. He was
devilish ceremonious, and made a bushel of apologies
for the freedom he was going to take; and, after
half a hundred hums and haws, told me, that he
came—that he came—to wait on me—at the request
of dear Miss Howe, on the account—on the account
—of Miss Harlowe. 
Well, Sir, speak on, said I: But give me leave to
say, that if your book be as long as your preface, it
will take up a week to read it. 
This was pretty rough, thou'lt say: But there's
nothing like balking these formalists at first. When
they are put out of their road, they are filled with
doubts of themselves, and can never get into it again: 
So that an honest fellow, impertinently attacked, as
I was, has all the game in his own hand quite thro'
the conference. 
He stroaked his chin, and hardly knew what to say. 
At last, after parenthesis within parenthesis, apologizing
for apologies, in imitation, I suppose of Swift's 

Digressions in praise of Digressions—I presume, I presume,
Sir, you were privy to the visit made to Miss
Howe by the young Ladies your Cousins, in the name
of Lord M. and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty
Lawrance? 
I was, Sir: And Miss Howe had a Letter afterwards,
signed by his Lordship and by those Ladies,
and underwritten by myself. Have you seen it, Sir? 
I can't say but I have. It is the principal cause of
this Visit: For Miss Howe thinks your part of it is
written with such an air of levity—Pardon me, Sir
—that she knows not whether you are in earnest, or
not, in your address to her for her interest to her
friend (a) . 
Will Miss Howe permit me to explain myself in
person to her, Mr. Hickman. 
O Sir, by no means. Miss Howe, I am sure, would
not give you that trouble. 
I should not think it a trouble. I will most readily
attend you, Sir, to Miss Howe, and satisfy her in all
her scruples. Come, Sir, I will wait upon you now. 
You have a chariot. Are alone. We can talk as
we ride. 
He hesitated, wriggled, winced, stroaked his ruffles,
set his wig, and pulled his neckcloth, which was long
enough for a bib—I am not going directly back to
Miss Howe, Sir. It will be as well, if you will be
so good as to satisfy Miss Howe by me. 
What is it she scruples, Mr. Hickman? 
Why, Sir, Miss Howe observes, that in your part
of the Letter, you say—But let me fee, Sir—I have
a copy of what you wrote [Pulling it out] Will you
give me leave, Sir? —Thus you begin—Dear Miss
Howe— 
No offence, I hope, Mr. Hickman? 

None in the least, Sir! —None at all, Sir! —Taking
aim, as it were, to read. 
Do you use spectacles, Mr. Hickman? 
Spectacles, Sir! His whole broad face lifted up at
me: Spectacles! —What makes you ask me such a
question? Such a young man as I use spectacles,
Sir!— 
They do in Spain, Mr. Hickman; young as well
as old, to save their eyes. —Have you ever read Prior's
Alma, Mr. Hickman? 
I have, Sir—Custom is every-thing in nations, as
well as with individuals: I know the meaning of your
question—But 'tis not the English custom.— 
Was you ever in Spain, Mr. Hickman? 
No, Sir: I have been in Holland. 
In Holland, Sir! —Never in France or Italy? — 
I was resolved to travel with him into the land of
Puzzledom. 
No, Sir, I cannot say I have, as yet. 
That's a wonder, Sir, when on the continent! 
I went on a particular affair: I was obliged to return
soon. 
Well, Sir; you was going to read—Pray be pleased
to proceed. 
Again he took aim, as if his eyes were older than
the rest of him; and re'd, After what is written above,
and signed by names and characters of such unquestionable
honour—To be sure, taking off his eye, nobody
questions the honour of Lord M. nor that of the good
Ladies who signed the Letter. 
I hope, Mr. Hickman, nobody questions mine
neither? 
If you please, Sir, I will read on. —I might have
been excused signing a name, almost as hateful to myself
[You are pleased to say]—as I KNOW it is to
You— 
Well, Mr. Hickman, I must interrupt you at this
place. In what I wrote to Miss Howe, I distinguished 

the word KNOW. I had a reason for it. Miss Howe
has been very free with my character. I have never
done her any harm. I take it very ill of her. And
I hope, Sir, you come in her name to make excuses
for it. 
Miss Howe, Sir, is a very polite young Lady. 
She is not accustomed to treat any man's character
unbecomingly. 
Then I have the more reason to take it amiss, Mr.
Hickman. 
Why, Sir, you know the friendship— 
No friendship should warrant such freedoms as Miss
Howe has taken with my character. 
I believe he began to wish he had not come near
me. He seemed quite disconcerted. 
Have you not heard Miss Howe treat my name
with great— 
Sir, I come not to offend or affront you: But you
know what a Love there is between Miss Howe and
Miss Harlowe. —I doubt, Sir, you have not treated
Miss Harlowe, as so fine a young Lady deserved to
be treated: And if Love for her friend has made
Miss Howe take freedoms, as you call them, a mind
not ungenerous, on such an occasion, will rather be
sorry for having given the cause, than— 
I know your consequence, Sir! —But I'd rather
have this reproof from a Lady, than from a Gentleman. 
I have a great desire to wait upon Miss Howe. 
I am persuaded we should soon come to a good understanding. 
Generous minds are always of kin. 
I know we should agree in every-thing. Pray, Mr.
Hickman, be so kind as to introduce me to Miss
Howe. 
Sir—I can signify your desire, if you please, to
Miss Howe. 
Do so. Be pleased to read on, Mr. Hickman. 
He did very formally, as if I remembred not what
I had written; and when he came to the passage 

about the Halter, the Parson, and the Hangman,
reading it, Why, Sir, says he, does not this look
like a jest? —Miss Howe thinks it does. It is not in
the Lady's power, you know, Sir, to doom you to
the Gallows. 
Then, if it were, Mr. Hickman, you think she
would? 
You say here to Miss Howe, proceeded he, that
Miss Harlowe is the most injured of her Sex. I know
from Miss Howe, that she highly resents the injuries
you own: Insomuch that Miss Howe doubts that she
shall never prevail upon her to overlook them: And
as your family are all desirous you should repair her
wrongs, and likewise desire Miss Howe's interposition
with her friend; Miss Howe fears, from this part of
your Letter, that you are too much in jest; and that
your offer to do her justice is rather in compliment
to your friends entreaties, than proceeding from your
own inclinations: And she desires to know your true
sentiments on this occasion, before she interposes
further. 
Do you think, Mr. Hickman, that, if I am capable
of deceiving my own relations, I have so much obligation
to Miss Howe, who has always treated me with
great freedom, as to acknowlege to her, what I don't
to them? 
Sir, I beg pardon: But Miss Howe thinks, that,
as you have written to her, she may ask you, by me,
for an explanation of what you have written. 
You see, Mr. Hickman, something of me. —Do
you think I am in jest, or in earnest? 
I see, Sir, you are a gay gentleman, of fine spirits,
and all That—All I beg in Miss Howe's name, is, to
know, if you really, and bona fide, join with your
friends in desiring her to use her interest to reconcile
you to Miss Harlowe? 
I should be extremely glad to be reconciled to Miss
Harlowe; and should owe great obligations to Miss
Howe, if she could bring about so happy an event. 

Well, Sir, and you have no objections to Marriage,
I presume, as the condition of that reconciliation? 
I never liked Matrimony in my life. I must be plain
with you, Mr. Hickman. 
I am sorry for it: I think it a very happy State. 
I hope you will find it so, Mr. Hickman. 
I doubt not but I shall, Sir. And I dare say, so
would you, if you were to have Miss Harlowe. 
If I could be happy in it with any-body, it would
be with Miss Harlowe. 
I am surprised, Sir! —Then, after all, you don't
think of marrying Miss Harlowe! —After the hard
usage— 
What hard usage, Mr. Hickman? I don't doubt
but a Lady of her niceness has represented what would
appear trifles to any other, in a very strong light. 
If what I have had hinted to me, Sir—Excuse me
—has been offered to the Lady, she has more than
trifles to complain of. 
Let me know what you have heard, Mr. Hickman? 
I will very truly answer to the accusations. 
Sir, you know best what you have done: You own
the Lady is the most injured, as well as the most deserving,
of her Sex. 
I do, Sir; and yet, I would be glad to know what
you have heard; for on that, perhaps, depends my
answer to the questions Miss Howe puts to me by
you. 
Why then, Sir, since you ask it, you cannot be
displeased if I answer you: —In the first place, Sir,
you will acknowlege, I suppose, that you promised
Miss Harlowe Marriage, and all That? 
Well, Sir, and I suppose what you have to charge
me with, is, That I was desirous to have all That,
without Marriage. 
Cot so, Sir, I know you are deemed to be a man
of wit: But may I not ask, if these things sit not too
light upon you? 

When a thing is done, and cannot be helped, 'tis
right to make the best of it. I wish the Lady would
think so too. 
I think, Sir, Ladies should not be deceived. I
think a promise to a Lady should be as binding as to
any other person, at the least. 
I believe you think so, Mr. Hickman: And I believe
you are a very honest good sort of a man. 
I would always keep my word, Sir, whether to man
or woman. 
You say well. And far be it from me to persuade
you to do otherwise. But what have you farther
heard? 
Thou wilt think, Jack, I must be very desirous to
know in what light my elected Spouse had represented
things to Miss Howe; and how far Miss Howe had
communicated them to Mr. Hickman. 
Sir, this is no part of my present business. 
But, Mr. Hickman, 'tis part of mine. I hope you
would not expect, that I should answer your questions,
at the same time that you refuse to answer mine. 
What, pray, have you farther heard? 
Why then, Sir, if I must say, I am told, that Miss
Harlowe was carried to a very bad house. 
Why, indeed, the people did not prove so good as
they should be. —What farther have you heard? 
I have heard, Sir, that the Lady had strange advantages
taken of her, very unfair ones; but what I
cannot say. 
And cannot you say? Cannot you guess? —Then
I'll tell you, Sir. Perhaps some liberty was taken
with her when she was asleep. Do you think no
Lady ever was taken at such an advantage? —You
know, Mr. Hickman, that Ladies are very shy of
trusting themselves with the modestest of our Sex,
when they are disposed to sleep; and why so, if they
did not expect, that advantages would be taken of
them at such times? 

But, Sir, had not the Lady something given her to
make her sleep? 
Ay, Mr. Hickman, that's the question: I want to
know if the Lady says she had? 
I have not seen all she has written; but by what
I have heard, it is a very black affair—Excuse me,
Sir. 
I do excuse you, Mr. Hickman: But, supposing it
were so, do you think a Lady was never imposed
upon by Wine, or so? —Do you think the most cautious
woman in the world might not be cheated by a
stronger liquor for a smaller, when she was thirsty,
after a fatigue in this very warm weather? And do you
think, if she was thus thrown into a profound sleep,
that she is the only Lady that was ever taken at such
advantage? 
Even as you make it, Mr. Lovelace, this matter is
not a light one. But I fear it is a great deal heavier
than as you put it. 
What reasons have you to fear this, Sir? What has
the Lady said? Pray, let me know. I have reason
to be so earnest. 
Why, Sir, Miss Howe herself knows not the whole. 
The Lady promises to give her all the particulars at a
proper time, if she lives; but has said enough to make
it out to be a very bad affair. 
I am glad Miss Harlowe has not yet given all the
particulars. And, since she has not; you may tell
Miss Howe from me, That neither she nor any woman
in the world can be more virtuous than Miss
Harlowe is to this hour, as to her own mind. Tell
her, that I hope she never will know the particulars; 
but that she has been unworthily used: Tell her, that
tho' I know not what she has said, yet I have such
an opinion of her veracity, that I would blindly subscribe
to the truth of every tittle of it, tho' it make me
ever so black. Tell her, that I have but three things
to blame her for; One, That she won't give me an 

opportunity of repairing her wrongs: The Second,
That she is so ready to acquaint every-body with what
she has suffered, that it will put it out of my power
to redress those wrongs, with any tolerable reputation
to either of us. Will this, Mr. Hickman, answer any
part of the intention of this visit? 
Why, Sir, this is talking like a man of honour, I
own. But you say there is a Third thing you blame
the Lady for: May I ask what That is? 
I don't know, Sir, whether I ought to tell it you,
or not. Perhaps you won't believe it, if I do. But
tho' the Lady will tell the truth, and nothing but the
truth; yet, perhaps, she will not tell you the whole
truth. 
Pray, Sir—But it mayn't be proper: —Yet you
give me great curiosity. —Sure there is no misconduct
in the Lady. I hope there is not. I am sure, if
Miss Howe did not believe her to be faultless in every
particular, she would not interest herself so much in
her favour as she does, dearly as she loves her. 
I love miss Harlowe too well, Mr. Hickman, to
wish to lessen her in Miss Howe's opinion; especially
as she is abandoned of every other friend. 
But, perhaps, it would hardly be credited, if I should
tell you. 
I should be very sorry, Sir, and so would Miss
Howe, if this poor Lady's conduct had laid her under
obligation to you for this reserve. —You have so much
the appearance of a gentleman, as well as are so
much distinguished in your family and fortunes, that
I hope you are incapable of loading such a young
Lady as this, in order to lighten yourself. —Excuse
me, Sir. 
I do, I do, Mr. Hickman. You say, you came
not with any intention to affront me. I take freedom,
and I give it. I should be very loth, I repeat,
to say any-thing that may weaken Miss Harlowe in
the good opinion of the only friend she thinks she has
eft. 

It may not be proper, said he, for me to know
your third article against this unhappy Lady: But I
never heard of any-body, out of her own implacable
family, that had the least doubt of her honour. Mrs.
Howe, indeed, once said, after a conference with one
of her Uncles, that she feared all was not right on her
side. —But else, I never heard— 
Oons, Sir, in a fierce tone, and with an erect mien,
stopping short upon him, which made him start back— 
'Tis next to blasphemy to question this Lady's honour. 
She is more pure than a vestal; for vestals have been
often warmed by their own fires. No age, from the
first to the present, ever produced, nor will the future,
to the end of the world, I dare averr, ever produce,
a young blooming Lady, tried as she has been tried,
who has stood all trials, as she has done. —Let me tell
you, Sir, That you never saw, never knew, never
heard of, such another woman as Miss Harlowe. 
Sir, Sir, I beg your pardon. Far be it from me
to question the Lady. You have not heard me say a
word, that could be so construed. I have the utmost
honour for her. Miss Howe loves her, as she loves
her own soul; and that she would not do. if she were
not sure she were as virtuous as herself. 
As herself, Sir! —I have a high opinion of Miss
Howe, Sir—But, I dare say— 
What, Sir, dare you say of Miss Howe? —I hope,
Sir, you will not presume to say any-thing to the disparagement
of Miss Howe! 
Presume, Mr. Hickman! —That is presuming language,
let me tell you, Mr. Hickman! 
The occasion for it, Mr. Lovelace, if designed, is
presuming, if your please. —I am not a man ready to
take offence, Sir—Especially where I am employed
as a mediator. But no man breathing shall say disparaging
things of Miss Howe, in my hearing, without
observation. 
Well said, Mr. Hickman. I dislike not your spirit, 

on such a supposed occasion. But what I was going
to say is this, That there is not, in my opinion, a
woman in the world, who ought to compare herself
with Miss Clarissa Harlowe till she has stood her trials,
and has behaved under them, and after them, as she
has done. You see, Sir, I speak against myself. 
You see I do. For, Libertine as I am thought to
be, I never will attempt to bring down the measures
of right and wrong to the standard of my actions. 
Why, Sir, this is very right. It is very noble, I
will say. But 'tis pity—Excuse me, Sir—'tis pity,
that the man who can pronounce so fine a sentence,
will not square his actions accordingly. 
That, Mr. Hickman, is another point. We all
err in some things. I wish not that Miss Howe
should have Miss Harlowe's trials: And I rejoice,
that she is in no danger of any such from so good a
man. 
Poor Hickman! —He looked as if he knew not
whether I meant a compliment or a reflection! 
But, proceeded I, since I find that I have excited
your curiosity, that you may not go away with a
doubt that may be injurious to the most admirable of
women, I am inclined to hint to you what I have in
the third place to blame her for. 
Sir, as you please—It may not be proper— 
It cannot be very improper, Mr. Hickman—So let
me ask you, What would Miss Howe think, if her
friend is the more determined against me, because she
thinks (in revenge to me, I verily believe that!) of
encouraging another Lover? 
How, Sir! —Sure this cannot be the case! —I can
tell you, Sir, if Miss Howe thought this, she would
not approve of it at all: For, little as you think Miss
Howe likes you, Sir, and little as she approves of your
actions by her friend, I know she is of opinion, that
she ought to have nobody living, but you: And
should continue single all her life, if she be not yours. 

Revenge and Obstinacy, Mr. Hickman, will make
women, the best of them, do very unaccountable
things. Rather than not put out both eyes of the
man they are offended with, they will give up one
of their own. 
I don't know what to say to this, Sir: But, sure,
she cannot encourage any other person's address!— 
So soon too—Why, Sir, she is, as we are told, so ill,
and so weak— 
Not in resentment weak, I'll assure you. I am
well acquainted with all her movements—And I tell
you, believe it, or not, that she refuses me in view of
another Lover. 
Can it be? 
'Tis true, by my Soul! —Has she not hinted This
to Miss Howe, do you think? 
No indeed, Sir. If she had, I should not have troubled
you at this time from Miss Howe. 
Well then, you see I am right: That tho' she cannot
be guilty of a falshood, yet she has not told her
friend the whole truth. 
What shall a man say to these things!—looking
most stupidly perplexed. 
Say! say! Mr. Hickman! —Who can account for
the workings and ways of a passionate and offended
woman? Endless would be the histories I could give
you, within my own knowlege, of the dreadful effects
of womens passionate resentments, and what that Sex
will do, when disappointed. 
&dotup;There was Miss Dorrington [Perhaps you
know her not] who ran away with her Father's
groom, because he would not let her have a half-pay
officer, with whom (her passions all up) she fell in
love at first sight, as he accidentally passed under her
window. 
&dotup;There was Miss Savage; she married her Mother's
coachman, because her Mother refused her a
journey to Wales; in apprehension, that Miss intended 

to league herself with a remote Cousin of
unequal fortunes, of whom she was not a little
fond when he was a visiting-guest at their house for
a week. 
&dotup;There was the young widow Sanderson; who
believing herself slighted by a younger Brother of a
noble family (Sarah Stout like) took it into her
head to drown herself. 
&dotup;Miss Sally Anderson [You have heard of her,
no doubt] being checked by her Uncle for encouraging
an address beneath her, in spite, threw herself
into the arms of an ugly dog, a shoemaker's
Apprentice, running away with him in a pair of
shoes he had just fitted to her feet, tho' she never
saw the fellow before, and hated him ever after: 
And at last, took Laudanum to make her forget for
ever her own folly.&dotup; 
But can there be a stronger instance in point, than
what the unaccountable resentments of such a Lady as
Miss Clarissa Harlowe afford us? Who, at this very
instant, ill as she is, not only encourages, but, in a
manner, makes court to, one of the most odious
dogs that ever was seen? I think Miss Howe should
not be told this—And yet she ought too, in order to
dissuade her from such a preposterous rashness. 
O fie! O strange! Miss Howe knows nothing of
this! To be sure she won't look upon her, if this be
true! 
'Tis true, very true, Mr. Hickman! True as I
am here to tell you so! —And he is an ugly fellow too; 
uglier to look at than me. 
Than you, Sir! Why, to be sure, you are one of
the handsomest men in England. 
Well, but the wretch she so spitefully prefers to me
is a mis-shapen, meager varlet; more like a skeleton
than a man! Then he dresses—you never saw a devil
so bedizened! Hardly a coat to his back, nor a shoe
to his foot: A bald-pated villain, yet grudges to buy 

a peruke to hide his baldness: For he is as covetous
as hell, never satisfied, yet plaguy rich. 
Why, Sir, there is some joke in this, surely. A
man of common parts knows not how to take such
gentlemen as you. But, Sir, if there be any truth in
the Story, what is he? Some Jew, or miserly Citizen,
I suppose, that may have presumed on the Lady's
distressful circumstances; and your lively wit points
him out as it pleases. 
Why, the rascal has estates in every county in England,
and out of England too. 
Some East-India Governor, I suppose, if there be
any-thing in it. The Lady once had thoughts of
going abroad. But, I fansy, all this time you are
in jest, Sir. If not, we must surely have heard of
him— 
Heard of him! Ay, Sir, we have all heard of him— 
But none of us care to be intimate with him—except
this Lady—and that, as I told you, in spite to me— 
His name, in short, is DEATH! —DEATH, Sir,
stamping, and speaking loud, and full in his ear; 
which made him jump half a yard high. 
Thou never beheldest any man so disconcerted. 
He looked as if the frightful Skeleton was before him,
and he had not his accounts ready. When a little
recovered, he fribbled with his waistcoat buttons, as
if he had been telling his beads. 
This, Sir, proceeded I, is her wooer! —Nay, she is
so forward a girl, that she wooes him: But I hope it
never will be a match. 
He had before behaved, and now looked, with
more spirit than I expected from him. 
I came, Sir, said he, as a mediator of differences. 
It behoves me to keep my temper. But, Sir, and
turned short upon me, as much as I love peace, and
to promote it, I will not be ill-used. 
As I had plaid so much upon him, it would have
been wrong to take him at his more than half-menace: 

Yet, I think, I owe him a grudge, for his presuming
to address Miss Howe. 
You mean no defiance, I presume, Mr. Hickman,
any more than I do offence. On that presumption, I
ask your excuse. But This is my way. I mean no
harm. I cannot let sorrow touch my heart. I cannot
be grave six minutes together, for the blood of me. 
I am a descendent of old Chancellor More, I believe; 
and should not forbear to cut a joke, were I upon the
scaffold. But you may gather, from what I have
said, that I prefer Miss Harlowe, and that upon the
justest grounds, to all the women in the world: And
I wonder, that there should be any difficulty to believe,
from what I have signed, and from what I have promised
to my relations, and enabled them to promise
for me, that I should be glad to marry that excellent
creature upon her own terms. I acknowlege to you,
Mr. Hickman, that I have basely injured her. If she
will honour me with her hand, I declare, that it is
my intention to make her the best of husbands. 
But, nevertheless, I must say, that, if she goes on
appealing her case, and exposing us both, as she does,
it is impossible to think the knot can be knit with
reputation to either. And altho', Mr. Hickman, I
have delivered my apprehensions under so ludicrous
a figure, I am afraid, that she will ruin her constitution; 
and, by seeking death when she may shun
him, will not be able to avoid him when she would be
glad to do so. 
This cool and honest speech let down his stiffened
muscles into complacency. He was my very obedient
and faithful humble servant several times over,
as I waited on him to his chariot: And I was his
almost as often. 
And so Exit Hickman. 