



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday Morning, Five o'clock (June 8.) 
Now is my Reformation secured; for I never
shall love any other woman! —O she is all variety! 
She must be ever new to me! Imagination
cannot form; much less can the Pencil paint; nor
can the Soul of painting, Poetry, describe an angel
so exquisitely, so elegantly lovely! —But I will not by
anticipation pacify thy impatience. Altho' the subject
is too hallowed for profane contemplation, yet
shalt thou have the whole before thee as it passed: 
And this not from a spirit wantoning in description
upon so rich a subject; but with a design to put a
bound to thy roving thoughts. It will be iniquity 

greater than a Lovelace ever was guilty of, to carry
them farther than I shall acknowlege. 
Thus then, connecting my last with the present, I
lead to it. 
Didst thou not, by the conclusion of my former,
perceive the consternation I was in, just as I was about
to re-peruse thy Letter, in order to prevail upon myself
to recede from my purpose of awaking in terrors
my slumbering Charmer? And what dost think was
the matter? 
I'll tell thee— 
At a little after Two, when the whole house was
still, or seemed to be so, and, as it proved, my Clarissa
in bed, and fast asleep; I also in a manner undressed
(as indeed I was for an hour before) and in
my gown and slippers, tho', to oblige thee, writing
on;—I was alarmed by a trampling noise over head,
and a confused buz of mix'd voices, some louder than
others, like scolding, and little short of screaming. 
While I was wondering what could be the matter,
down stairs ran Dorcas, and at my door, in an accent
rather frightedly and hoarsly inward, than shrilly
clamorous, she cried out Fire! Fire! And this the
more alarmed me, as she seemed to endeavour to cry
out louder, but could not. 
My pen (its last scrawl a benediction on my Beloved)
dropt from my fingers; and up started I; and
making but three steps to the door, opening it, I
cried out, Where! Where! almost as much terrified
as the wench: While she, more than half-undrest,
her petticoats in her hand, unable to speak distinctly,
pointed up stairs. 
I was there in a moment, and found all owing to
the carelessness of Mrs. Sinclair's cook-maid, who,
having sat up to read the simple History of Dorastus
and Faunia when she should have been in bed, had
set fire to an old pair of callico window-curtains. 
She had had the presence of mind, in her fright, 

to tear down the half-burnt vallens, as well as curtains,
and had got them, tho' blazing, into the chimney,
by the time I came up; so that I had the satisfaction
to find the danger happily over. 
Mean time Dorcas, after she had directed me upstairs,
not knowing the worst was over, and expecting
every minute the house would be in a blaze, out
of tender regard for her Lady [I shall for ever love
the wench for it] ran to her door, and rapping loudly
at it, in a recovered voice, cried out, with a shrillness
equal to her Love, Fire! Fire! —The house is on fire! 
—Rise, Madam! —This instant rise—if you would not
be burnt in your bed! 
No sooner had she made this dreadful outcry, but
I heard her Lady's door, with hasty violence, unbar,
unbolt, unlock, and open, and my Charmer's voice
sounding like that of one going into a fit. 
Thou mayest believe that I was greatly affected. 
I trembled with concern for her, and hastened down
faster than the alarm of fire had made me run up, in
order to satisfy her, that all the danger was over. 
When I had flown down to her chamber-door, there
I beheld the most charming creature in the world,
supporting herself on the arm of the gasping Dorcas,
sighing, trembling, and ready to faint, with nothing
on but an under-petticoat, her lovely bosom half-open,
and her feet just slipt into her shoes. As soon
as she saw me, she panted, and struggled to speak; 
but could only say, Oh, Mr. Lovelace! and down
was ready to sink. 
I clasped her in my arms with an ardor she never
felt before: My dearest Life! fear nothing: I have
been up—The danger is over—The fire is got under
—And how, foolish devil! [to Dorcas] could you
thus, by your hideous yell, alarm and frighten my
angel! 
Oh Jack! how her sweet bosom, as I clasped her
to mine, heaved and panted! I could even distinguish 

her dear heart flutter, flutter, flutter against mine; 
and for a few minutes, I feared she would go into
fits. 
Lest the half-lifeless Charmer should catch cold in
this undress, I lifted her to her bed, and sat down
by her upon the side of it, endeavouring with the utmost
tenderness, as well of action as expression, to
dissipate her terrors. 
But what did I get by this my generous care of her,
and by my successful endeavour to bring her to herself? 
—Nothing (ungrateful as she was!) but the most passionate
exclamations: For we had both already forgotten
the occasion, dreadful as it was, which had
thrown her into my arms: I, from the joy of incircling
the almost disrobed body of the loveliest of her
Sex; she, from the greater terrors that arose from
finding herself in my arms, and both seated on the
bed, from which she had been so lately frighted. 
And now, Belford, reflect upon the distance at
which the watchful Charmer had hitherto kept me: 
Reflect upon my Love, and upon my Sufferings for
her: Reflect upon her Vigilance, and how long I
had lain in wait to elude it; the awe I had stood in,
because of her frozen virtue and over-niceness; and
that I never before was so happy with her; and then
think how ungovernable must be my transports in
those happy moments! —And yet, in my own account,
I was both decent and generous. 
But, far from being affected, as I wished, by an
address so fervent (although from a man for whom she
had so lately owned a regard, and with whom, but
an hour or two before, she had parted with so much
satisfaction) I never saw a bitterer, or more moving
grief, when she came fully to herself. 
She appealed to heaven against my treachery, as she
called it; while I, by the most solemn vows, pleaded
my own equal fright, and the reality of the danger
that had alarmed us both. 

She conjured me, in the most solemn and affecting
manner, by turns threatening and soothing, to quit
her apartment, and permit her to hide herself from
the light, and from every human eye. 
I besought her pardon; yet could not avoid offending; 
and repeatedly vowed, that the next morning's
Sun should witness our espousals: But, taking, I suppose,
all my protestations of this kind as an indication
that I intended to proceed to the last extremity, she
would hear nothing that I said; but, redoubling her
struggles to get from me, in broken accents, and exclamations
the most vehement, she protested, that
she would not survive what she called a treatment so
disgraceful and villainous; and, looking all wildly
round her, as if for some instrument of mischief, she
espied a pair of sharp-pointed scissars on a chair by
the bed-side, and endeavoured to catch them up, with
design to make her words good on the spot. 
Seeing her desperation, I begged her to be pacified; 
that she would hear me speak but one word; declaring
that I intended no dishonour to her: And
having seized the scissars, I threw them into the
chimney; and she still insisting vehemently upon my
distance, I permitted her to take the chair. 
But, O the sweet discomposure! —Her bared shoulders
and arms, so inimitably fair and lovely: Her
spread hands crossed over her charming neck; yet
not half concealing its glossy beauties: The scanty
coat, as she rose from me, giving the whole of her
admirable shape, and fine-turn'd limbs: Her eyes
running over, yet seeming to threaten future vengeance: 
And at last her lips uttering what every indignant
look and glowing feature portended; exclaiming
as if I had done the worst I could do, and
vowing never to forgive me; wilt thou wonder if I
resumed the incensed, the already too-much-provoked
Fair-one? 
I did; and clasped her once more to my bosom: 

But, considering the delicacy of her frame, her force
was amazing, and shewed how much in earnest she
was in her resentment; for it was with the utmost
difficulty that I was able to hold her: Nor could I
prevent her sliding through my arms, to fall upon her
knees: Which she did at my feet: And there, in
the anguish of her soul, her streaming eyes lifted up
to my face with supplicating softness, hands folded,
dishevelled hair; for her night head-dress having fallen
off in her struggling, her charming tresses fell
down in naturally shining ringlets, as if officious to
conceal the dazling beauties of her neck and shoulders; 
her lovely bosom too heaving with sighs, and
broken sobs, as if to aid her quivering lips, in pleading
for her—In this manner, but when her grief
gave way to her speech, in words pronounced with
that emphatical propriety, which distinguishes this admirable
creature in her elocution from all the women
I ever heard speak; did she implore my compassion,
and my honour. 
‘Consider me, dear Lovelace,’ [dear was her
charming word!] ‘on my knees I beg you to consider
me, as a poor creature who has no protector
but You; who has no defence but your Honour: 
By that Honour! By your Humanity! By all you
have vowed! I conjure you not to make me abhor
myself! —Not to make me vile in my own eyes!’ 
I mentioned the morrow as the happiest day of my
life. 
Tell me not of to-morrow. If indeed you mean
me honourably, Now, This very instant NOW!
you must shew it, and begone! You can never in a
whole long life repair the evils you may NOW make
me suffer. 
Wicked wretch! —Insolent villain! —Yes, she called
me insolent villain, altho' so much in my power! 
And for what?—only for kissing (with passion indeed)
her inimitable neck, her lips, her cheeks, her forehead, 

head, and her streaming eyes, as this assemblage of
beauties offered itself at once to my ravished sight; 
she continuing kneeling at my feet, as I sat. 
If I am a villain, Madam—And then my grasping,
but trembling hand—I hope I did not hurt the tenderest
and loveliest of all her beauties—If I am a villain,
Madam— 
She tore my ruffle, shrunk from my happy hand,
with amazing force and agility, as with my other arm
I would have incircled her waist. 
Indeed you are! —The worst of villains! —Help!
dear blessed people! and screamed—No help for a
poor creature!— 
Am I then a villain, Madam? —Am I then a villain,
say you?—and clasped both my arms about her,
offering to raise her to my bounding heart. 
O no! —And yet you are! —And again I was her
dear Lovelace! —Her hands again clasped over her
charming bosom: —Kill me! Kill me! —If I am
odious enough in your eyes, to deserve this treatment; 
and I will thank you! —Too long, much too
long, has my life been a burden to me! —Or, wildly
looking all around her, give me but the means, and
I will instantly convince you, that my Honour is
dearer to me than my Life! 
Then, with still folded hands, and fresh-streaming
eyes, I was her blessed Lovelace; and she would
thank me with her latest breath, if I would permit
her to make that preference, or free her from further
indignities. 
I sat suspended for a moment: By my Soul, thought
I, thou art, upon full proof, an angel and no woman! 
Still, however, close clasping her to my bosom,
as I had raised her from her knees, she again
slid through my arms, and dropt upon them: —‘See,
Mr. Lovelace! —Good God! that I should live to
see this hour, and to bear this treatment! —See at
your feet a poor creature, imploring your pity, 

who, for your sake, is abandoned of all the world! 
Let not my Father's curse thus dreadfully operate! 
Be not you the inflicter, who have been the cause
of it: But spare me, I beseech you spare me! — 
For how have I deserved this treatment from you? 
—For your own sake, if not for my sake, and as you
would that God Almighty, in your last hour,
should have mercy upon you, spare me!’— 
What heart but must have been penetrated? 
I would again have raised the dear suppliant from
her knees; but she would not be raised, till my
softened mind, she said, had yielded to her prayer,
and bid her rise to be innocent. 
Rise then, my angel! Rise, and be what you are,
and all you wish to be! Only pronounce me pardoned
for what has passed, and tell me you will continue
to look upon me with that eye of favour and
serenity which I have been blessed with for some days
past, and I will submit to my beloved conqueress,
whose power never was at so great an height with
me, as now; and retire to my apartment. 
God Almighty, said she, hear your prayers in your
most arduous moments, as you have heard mine! 
And now leave me, this moment leave me, to my
own recollection: In that you will leave me to misery
enough, and more than you ought to wish to your
bitterest enemy. 
Impute not every-thing, my best Beloved, to design; 
for design it was not— 
O Mr. Lovelace! 
Upon my Soul, Madam, the fire was real—[And
so it was, Jack!] —The house, my dearest Life, might
have been consumed by it, as you will be convinced
in the morning by ocular demonstration. 
O Mr. Lovelace!— 
Let my passion for you, Madam, and the unexpected
meeting of you at your chamber-door, in an
attitude so charming— 

Leave me, leave me, this moment! —I beseech
you, leave me; looking wildly and in confusion about
her, and upon herself. 
Excuse me, dearest creature, for those liberties,
which, innocent as they were, your too great delicacy
may make you take amiss— 
No more! No more! —Leave me, I beseech you! 
Again looking upon herself, and around her, in a
sweet confusion—Begone! Begone!— 
Then weeping, she struggled vehemently to withdraw
her hands, which all the while I held between
mine. —Her struggles! —O what additional charms,
as I now reflect, did her struggles give to every feature,
every limb, of a person so sweetly elegant and
lovely! 
Impossible, my dearest Life, till you pronounce
my pardon! —Say but you forgive me! —Say but you
forgive me! 
I beseech you, begone! Leave me to myself, that
I may think what I can do, and what I ought to do. 
That, my dearest creature, is not enough. You
must tell me, that I am forgiven; that you will see
me to-morrow, as if nothing had happened. 
And then I clasped her again in my arms, hoping
she would not forgive me— 
I will—I do forgive you—Wretch that you are! 
Nay, my Clarissa! And is it such a reluctant pardon,
mingled with a word so upbraiding, that I am to
be put off with, when you are thus [clasping her
close to me] in my power? 
I do, I do forgive you! 
Heartily? 
Yes, heartily! 
And freely? 
Freely! 
And will you look upon me to-morrow as if nothing
had passed? 
Yes, yes! 

I cannot take these peevish affirmatives, so much
like intentional negatives! —Say you will, upon your
honour. 
Upon my honour, then—O now, begone! begone! 
—And never—never— 
What, never, my angel! —Is this forgiveness! 
Never, said she, let what has passed be remembered
more! 
I insisted upon one kiss to seal my pardon—And
retired like a fool, a woman's fool, as I was! —I
sneakingly retired! —Couldst thou have believed it? 
But I had no sooner entered my own apartment,
than, reflecting upon the opportunity I had lost, and
that all I had gained was but an encrease of my own
difficulties; and upon the ridicule I should meet with
below upon a weakness so much out of my usual character; 
I repented, and hastened back, in hope,
that through the distress of mind which I left her in,
she had not so soon fastened her door; and I was
fully resolved to execute all my purposes, be the consequence
what it would; for, thought I, I have already
sinned beyond cordial forgiveness, I doubt; 
and if fits and desperation ensue, I can but marry at
last, and then I shall make her amends. 
But I was justly punished;—for her door was fast: 
And hearing her sigh and sob, as if her heart would
burst, My beloved creature, said I, rapping gently
[her sobbings then ceasing] I want but to say three
words to you, which must be the most acceptable
you ever heard from me. Let me see you but for
one moment. 
I thought I heard her coming to open the door,
and my heart leapt in that hope; but it was only to
draw another bolt, to make it still the faster; and
she either could not or would not answer me, but retired
to the further end of her apartment, to her
closet probably: And more like a fool than before,
again I sneaked away. 

This was my Mine, my Plot! —And this was all
I made of it! 
I love her more than ever! —And well I may! — 
Never saw I polished ivory so beautiful as her arms
and shoulders; never touched I velvet so soft as her
skin: Her virgin bosom—O Belford, she is all perfection! 
—Then such an elegance! —In her struggling
losing her shoe (but just slipt on, as I told thee)
her pretty foot equally white and delicate as the hand
of any other woman, or even as her own hand! 
But seest thou not, that I have a claim of merit
for a grace that every-body hitherto had denied me? 
And that is, for a capacity of being moved by prayers
and tears—Where, where, on this occasion, was the
Callus, where the Flint, by which my heart was said
to be surrounded? 
This, indeed, is the first instance in the like case,
that ever I was wrought upon. But why? Because
I never before encountred a resistance so much in earnest: 
A resistance, in short, so irresistible. 
What a triumph has her Sex obtained in my
thoughts by this trial, and this resistance? 
But if she can now forgive me—Can! —She must. 
Has she not upon her honour already done it? —But
how will the dear creature keep that part of her promise,
which engages her to see me in the morning,
as if nothing had happened? 
She would give the world, I fansy, to have the first
interview over! —She had not best reproach me— 
Yet not to reproach me! —What a charming puzzle! 
—Let her break her word with me at her peril. Fly
me she cannot—No appeals lie from my tribunal— 
What friend has she in the world, if my compassion
exert not itself in her favour? —And then the worthy
Captain Tomlinson, and her Uncle Harlowe,
will be able to make all up for me, be my next offence
what it will. 
As to thy apprehensions of her committing any 

rashness upon herself, whatever she might have done
in her passion if she could have seized upon her scissars,
or found any other weapon, I dare say, there is
no fear of that from her deliberate mind. A man
has trouble enough with these truly pious, and truly
virtuous girls [Now I believe there are such]; he had
need to have some benefit from, some security in,
the rectitude of their minds. 
In short, I fear nothing in this Lady but Grief: 
Yet that's a slow worker, you know; and gives time
to pop in a little Joy between its Sullen Fits. 