


This blessed Day all the Family seem'd to take
Delight to equip themselves for the Celebration
of the Sabbath, in the little Chapel; and Lady
Jones and Mr. Williams came in her Chariot, and
the two Miss Darnfords, in their own; with each
a Footman, besides the Coachman. And we breakfasted
together, in a most agreeable manner. My
dear Father appeared quite spruce and neat, and
was greatly caressed by the three Ladies. As we
were at Breakfast, my Master told Mr. Williams,
we must let the Psalms alone, he doubted, for want
of a Clerk; but Mr. Williams said, No, nothing
should be wanting that he could supply. My Father
said, If it might be permitted him, he would,
as well as he was able, perform that Office; for it
was always what he had taken Delight in. And as I
know he had learnt Psalmody formerly, in his Youth,
and had constantly practised it in private, at home,
of Sunday Evenings, (as well as endeavour'd to teach
it in the little School he so unsuccessfully set up, at the
Beginning of his Misfortunes, before he took to hard
Labour) I was in no Pain for his undertaking it in this
little Congregation. They seemed much pleased
with this; and so we went to Chapel, and made a
pretty tolerable Appearance; Mrs. Jewkes, and all
the Servants attending, but the Cook; and I never
saw Divine Service perform'd with more Solemnity,
nor assisted at with greater Devotion and Decency; 
my Master, Lady Jones, and the two Misses, setting
a lovely Example. 
My good Father perform'd his Part with great
Applause, making the Responses as if he had been a
practised Parish Clerk; and giving the * 
xxiiid Psalm,
which consisting of but three Staves, we had it all; 
and he read the Line, and began the Tune with a
Heart so intirely affected with the Duty, that he
went thro' it distinctly, calmly, and fervently at
the same time; so that Lady Jones whisper'd me, 

That good Men were fit for all Companies, and present
to every laudable Occasion: And Miss Darnford
said, God bless the dear good Man! —You must
think how I rejoiced in my Mind! 
I know, my dear Mother, you can say most of
the shorter Psalms by Heart; so I need not transcribe
it, especially as your chief Treasure is a Bible; 
and a worthy Treasure it is. I know nobody makes
more or better Use of it. 
Mr. Williams gave us an excellent Discourse on
Liberality and Generosity, and the Blessing attending
the right Use of Riches, from the xith Chapter
of Proverbs, ver. 24, 25. There is that scattereth,
and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth
more than is meet; but it tendeth to Poverty. The
liberal Soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth,
shall be watered also himself. And he treated the
Subject in so handsome a manner, that my Master's
Delicacy, who, at first, was afraid of some personal
Compliments, was not offended, he judiciously keeping
to Generals; and it was an elegant and sensible
Discourse, as my Master said. 
My Father was, as in the Clerk's Place, just under
the Desk; and Lady Jones beckon'd her Footman,
and whisper'd him to beg him to favour us
with another Psalm, when the Sermon was ended,
he, thinking as he said afterwards, that the former
was rather of the longest, chose the shortest in the
Book; which, you know, is the cxviith*.  

My Master thanked Mr. Williams for his excellent
Discourse, and so did the Ladies; as also I did, most
heartily; and he was pleased to take my dear Father
by the Hand, as Mr. Williams also did, and thanked
him. The Ladies also made him their kind Compliments; 
and the Servants all looked upon him with
Countenances of Respect and Pleasure. 
At Dinner, do what I could, I was forced to take
the Upper-end of the Table; and my Master sat
at the Lower-end, between Mr. Williams and my
Father. And he said, Pamela, you are so dextrous,
that I think you may help the Ladies yourself; and
I will help my two good Friends. I should have
told you tho', that I dressed myself in a flower'd
Satten, that was my Lady's, and look'd quite fresh
and good, and which was given me at first by my
Master; and the Ladies, who had not seen me out
of my Homespun before, made me abundance of
fine Compliments, as soon as they saw me first. 
Talking of the Psalms, just after Dinner, my Master
was very naughty, if I may so say: For he said
to my Father, Mr. Andrews, I think, in the Afternoon,
as we shall have only Prayers, we may have
one longer Psalm; and what think you of the
cxxxviith? —O good Sir! said I, pray, pray, not a
Word more! —Say what you will, Pamela, said he,
you shall sing it to us, according to your own Version,
before these good Ladies go away. My Father
smil'd, but was half concern'd for me; and said,
Will it bear, and please your Honour? —O ay, said 
he, never fear it; so long as Mrs. Jewkes is not in
the Hearing. 
This excited all the Ladies Curiosity; and Lady
Jones said, She should be loth to desire to hear any
thing that would concern me; but should be glad I
would give Leave for it. Indeed, Madam, said I,
I must beg you won't insist upon it. I cannot bear
it. ––– You shall see it indeed, Ladies, said my Master; 
and pray, Pamela, not always as you please,
neither. —Then, pray, Sir, said I, not in my hearing,
I hope. —Sure, Pamela, return'd he, you would
not write what is not fit to be heard! ––– But, Sir,
said I, there are particular Cases, Times, and Occasions,
that may make a thing passable at one time,
that would not be tolerable at another. O, said he,
let me judge of that, as well as you, Pamela. These
Ladies know a good Part of your Story; and, let
me tell you, what they know is more to your Credit
than mine; so that if I have no Averseness to
reviving the Occasion, you may very well bear it. 
Said he, I will put you out of your Pain, Pamela; 
I believe I put it in my Pocket on purpose. 
I stood up, and said, Indeed, Sir, I can't bear it! 
I hope you'll allow me to leave the Room a Minute,
if you will read it. Indeed, but I won't, answer'd
he. Lady Jones said, Pray, good Sir, don't let us
hear it, if Mrs. Andrews be so unwilling. Well,
Pamela, said my Master, I will put it to your Choice,
whether I shall read it now, or you will sing it by-and-by.
That's very hard, Sir, said I. It must be
one, I assure you, said he. Why then, Sir, reply'd I,
you must do as you please; for I cannot sing it. 
Well, then, said my Master, I find I must read
it; and yet, added he, after all, I had as well let it
alone; for it is no great Reputation to myself. O
then, said Miss Darnford, pray let us hear it to chuse. 
Why then, proceeded he, the Case was this: Pamela,
I find, when she was in the Time of her Confinement,
(that is, added he, when she was taken Prisoner,
in order to make me one; for that is the Upshot
of the Matter) in the Journal she kept, which
was intended for nobody's Perusal but her Parents,
tells them, That she was importuned, one Sunday, by
Mrs. Jewkes, to sing a Psalm; but her Spirits not permitting,
she declin'd it: But after Mrs. Jewkes was
gone down, she says, she recollected, that the
cxxxviith Psalm was applicable to her own Case; 
Mrs. Jewkes having often, on other Days, in vain,
besought her to sing a Song. That thereupon she
turn'd it more to her own supposed Case; and believing
Mrs. Jewkes had a Design against her Honour,
and looking upon her as her Gaoler, she thus
gives her Version of this Psalm. But pray, Mr.
Williams, do you read one Verse of the common
Translation, and I will read one of Pamela's. Then
Mr. Williams pulling out his little Pocket Common-prayer
Book, read the first two Stanzas. 


I.
When we did sit in Babylon,
 The Rivers round about:
Then in Remembrance of Sion,
 The Tears for Grief burst out.


II.
We hang'd our Harps and Instruments
 The Willow-trees upon:
For in that Place Men, for that Use,
 Had planted many a one.


My Master then read: 



I.
When sad, I sat in B&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;n-hall,
 All watched round about;
And thought of every absent Friend,
 The Tears for Grief burst out.


II.
My Joys, and Hopes, all overthrown,
 My Heart-strings almost broke:
Unfit my Mind for Melody,
 Much more to bear a Joke.


The Ladies said, It was very pretty; and Miss
Darnford, That somebody else had well observ'd, that
I had need to be less concerned than themselves. 
I knew, said my Master, I should get no Credit
by shewing this. But let us read on, Mr. Williams. 
So Mr. Williams read; 


III.
Then they, to whom we Pris'ners were,
 Said to us tauntingly;
Now let us hear your Hebrew Songs,
 And pleasant Melody.


Now this, said my Master, is very near: And
read; 


III.
Then she, to whom I Pris'ner was,
 Said to me tauntingly;
Now chear your Heart, and sing a Song,
 And tune your Mind to Joy.


Mighty sweet, said Mr. Williams. But let us see
how the next Verse is turn'd. It is this: 



IV.
Alas! said we, who can once frame
 His heavy Heart to sing
The Praises of our loving God,
 Thus under a strange King?


Why, said my Master, it is turn'd with beautiful
Simplicity, thus: 


IV.
Alas! said I, how can I frame
 My heavy Heart to sing,
Or tune my Mind, while thus inthrall'd
 By such a wicked Thing!


Very pretty, said Mr. Williams. Lady Jones said,
O dear, Madam, can you wish that we should be
depriv'd of this new Instance of your Genius and
Accomplishments? 
O! said my dear Father, you will make my good
Child proud. No, said my Master, very generously,
Pamela can't be proud. For no one is proud to hear
themselves prais'd, but those who are not us'd to it. 
–––But proceed, Mr. Williams. He read; 


V.
But yet, if I Jerusalem
 Out of my Heart let slide;
Then let my Fingers quite forget
 The warbling Harp to guide.


Well, now, said my Master, for Pamela's Version! 


V.
But yet, if from my Innocence
 I, ev'n in Thought, should slide,
Then let my Fingers quite forget
 The sweet Spinnet to guide.



Mr. Williams read; 


VI.
And let my Tongue within my Mouth,
 Be ty'd for ever fast,
If I rejoice before I see
 Thy full Deliv'rance past.


This also, said my Master, is very near. 


VI.
And let my Tongue, within my Mouth,
 Be lock'd for ever fast,
If I rejoice before I see
 My full Deliv'rance past.


Now, good Sir, said I, oblige me; don't read any
further: Pray don't! O pray, Madam, said Mr.
Williams, let me beg to have the rest read; for I
long to know who you make the Sons of Edom,
and how you turn the Psalmist's Execrations against
the insulting Babylonians. 
Well, Mr. Williams, reply'd I, you should not have
said so. O, said my Master, that is one of the best
things of all. Poor Mrs. Jewkes stands for Edom's
Sons; and we must not lose this, because I think it
one of my Pamela's Excellencies, that tho' thus oppress'd,
she prays for no Harm upon the Oppressor. 
Read, Mr. Williams, the next Stanza. So he read; 


VII.
Therefore, O Lord, remember now
 The cursed Noise and Cry,
That Edom's Sons against us made,
 When they rais'd our City.


VIII.
Remember, Lord, their cruel Words,
 When, with a mighty Sound,

They cried, Down, yea, down with it,
 Unto the very Ground.


Well, said my Master, here seems, in what I am
going to read, a little bit of a Curse indeed; but I
think it makes no ill Figure in the Comparison. 


VII.
And thou, Almighty! recompense
 The Evils I endure,
From those who seek my sad Disgrace,
 So causeless! to procure.


And now, said he, for Edom's Sons! Tho' a little
severe in the Imputation. 


VIII.
Remember, Lord, this Mrs. Jewkes,
 When with a mighty Sound,
She cries, Down with her Chastity,
 Down to the very Ground!


Sure, Sir, said I, this might have been spar'd! But
the Ladies and Mr. Williams said, No, by no means! 
And I see the poor wicked Woman has no Favourers
among them. 
Now, said my Master, read the Psalmist's heavy
Curses: And Mr. Williams read; 


IX.
Ev'n so shalt thou, O Babylon!
 At length to Dust be brought:
And happy shall that Man be call'd,
 That our Revenge hath wrought.


X.
Yea, blessed shall that Man be call'd,
 That takes thy little ones,

And dasheth them in pieces small
 Against the very Stones.


Thus, said he, very kindly, has my Pamela turn'd
these Lines. 


IX.
Ev'n so shalt thou, O wicked one,
 At length to Shame be brought:
And happy shall all those be call'd,
 That my Deliv'rance wrought.


X.
Yea, blessed shall the Man be call'd,
 That shames thee of thy Evil,
And saves me from thy vile Attempts,
 And thee, too, from the D&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;l.


I fansy this blessed Man, said my Master, smiling,
was, at that time, hoped to be you, Mr. Williams,
if the Truth was known. Sir, said he, whoever it
was intended for then, it can be nobody but your
good Self now. 
I could hardly hold up my Head for the Praises
the kind Ladies were pleased to heap upon me. I
am sure, by this, they are very partial in my Favour; 
all because my Master is so good to me, and loves
to hear me praised; for I see no such Excellence in
these Lines, as they would make me believe, besides
what is borrow'd from the Psalmist. 
We all, as before, and the Cook-maid too, attended
the Prayers of the Church in the Afternoon; and
my dear Father concluded with the following Stanzas
of the cxlyth Psalm; suitably magnifying the holy
Name of God for all his Mercies; but did not
observe altogether the Method in which they stand; 
which was the less necessary, he thought, as he
gave out the Lines. 



The Lord is just in all his ways;
 His Works are holy all:
And he is near all those that do
 In Truth upon him call.


He the Desires of all of them
 That fear him, will fulfil,
And he will hear them when they cry,
 And save them all he will.


The Eyes of all do wait on thee;
 Thou dost them all relieve:
And thou to each sufficing Food,
 In Season due, dost give.


Thou openest thy plenteous Hand,
 And bounteously dost fill
All things whatever that do live,
With Gifts of thy Good-will.


My thankful Mouth shall gladly speak
 The Praises of the Lord:
All Flesh to praise his holy Name,
 For ever shall accord.


We walked in the Garden till Tea was ready; 
and as we went by the Back-door, my Master said
to me, Of all the Flowers in the Garden, the Sun-flower
is the fairest! ––– O, Sir, said I, let that be
now forgot! Mr. Williams heard him say so, and
seem'd a little out of Countenance: Whereupon my
Master said, I mean not to make you serious, Mr.
Williams; but we see how strangely things are brought
about. I see other Scenes hereabouts, that, in my
Pamela's Dangers, give me more Cause of Concern,
than any thing you ever did, should give you. Sir,
said he, you are very generous. 

My Master and Mr. Williams afterwards walked
together, for a Quarter of an Hour, and talked about
general things, and some scholastick Subjects, and
joined us, very well pleased with one another's Conversation. 
Lady Jones said, putting herself on one side of
me, as my Master was of the other, But pray, Sir,
when is the happy Time to be? We want it over,
that we may have you with us, as long afterwards as
you can. Said my Master, I would have it to morrow
or next Day, at farthest, if Pamela will: For
I have sent for a Licence, and the Messenger will
be here to-night, or early in the Morning, I hope. 
But, added he, pray, Pamela, do not take beyond
Thursday. She was pleased to say, Sure it will not
be delay'd by you, Madam, more than needs! ––– 
Well, said he, now you are on my Side, I will leave
you with her, to settle it: And, I hope, she will
not let little bashful Niceties be important with her; 
and so he joined the two Misses. 
Lady Jones told me, I was to blame, she would
take upon her to say, if I delay'd it a Moment; 
because she understood Lady Davers was very uneasy
at the Prospect that it would be so; and if any
thing should happen, it would be a sad thing! –––– 
Madam, said I, when he was pleased to mention it
to me first, he said it should be in fourteen Days; and
afterwards, ask'd me if I would have it in the first
or the second Seven. I answer'd,––– for how could
I do otherwise? In the second: He desir'd it might
not be the last Day of the second Seven. Now,
Madam, said I, as he was then pleased to speak his
Mind, no doubt, I would not for any thing seem
too forward. 
Well, but, said she, as he now urges you in so
genteel and gentlemanly a manner for a shorter Day,
I think, if I was in your place, I would agree to it. 

She saw me hesitate and blush, and said, Well, you
know best; but I say only what I would do. I said,
I would consider of it; and if I saw he was very
earnest, to be sure I should think I ought to oblige
him. 
Miss Darnfords were begging to be at the Wedding,
and to have a Ball: And they said, Pray, Mrs.
Andrews, second our Requests, and we shall be
greatly obliged to you. Indeed, Ladies, said I, I
cannot promise that, if I might. Why so? said they. 
––– Because, answer'd I,––– I know not what! But,
I think, one may, with Pleasure, celebrate an Anniversary
of one's Nuptials; but the Day itself––– 
Indeed, Ladies, I think it is too solemn a Business,
for the Parties of our Sex, to be very gay upon! 
It is a quite serious and awful Affair: And I am
sure, in your own Cases, you would be of my Mind. 
Why then, said Miss Darnford, the more need one
has to be as light-hearted and merry as one can. 
I told you, said my Master, what sort of an Answer
you'd have from Pamela. The younger Miss
said, She never heard of such grave Folks in her
Life, on such an Occasion! Why, Sir, said she, I
hope you'll sing Psalms all Day, and Miss will
fast and pray! Such Sackcloth and Ashes Doings,
for a Wedding, did I never hear of! ––– She
spoke a little spitefully, I thought; and I return'd no
Answer. I shall have enough to do, I reckon, in
a-while, if I am to answer every one that will envy
me! 
We went in to Tea, and all the Ladies could prevail
upon my Master for, was a Dancing-match
before he left this Country; but Miss Darnford said,
It should then be at their House; for, truly, if she
might not be at the Wedding, she would be affronted,
and come no more hither, till we had been there. 

When they were gone, my Master would have
had my Father stay till the Affair was over; but he
begg'd he might set out as soon as it was light in the
Morning; for, he said, my Mother would be doubly
uneasy at his Stay; and he burned with Impatience,
to let her know all the happy things that had befallen
her Daughter. When my Master found him so desirous
to go, he called Mr. Thomas, and order'd
him to get a particular Bay-horse ready betimes in
the Morning, for my Father, and a Portmanteau,
to put his Things in; and to attend him a Day's
Journey; And if, said he, Mr. Andrews chuses it,
see him safe to his own Home. And, added he, as
that Horse will serve you, Mr. Andrews, to ride
backwards and forwards, to see us when we go to
Bedfordshire, I make you a Present of it, with the
Accoutrements. And seeing my Father going to
speak, he added, I won't be said Nay. O how good
was this! 
He also said a great many kind things at Suppertime,
and gave him all the Papers he had of mine; 
but desir'd, when he and my Mother had read them,
that he would return them to him again. And then
he said, So affectionate a Father and Daughter may,
perhaps, be glad to be alone together; therefore,
remember me to your good Wife, and tell her, it
will not be long, I hope, before I see you together,
on a Visit to your Daughter, at my other House; 
and so I wish you Good-night, and a good Journey,
if you go before I see you; and then he shook Hands,
and left my dear Father almost unable to speak, thro'
the Sense of his Favours and Goodness. 
You may believe, my dear Mother, how loth I
was to part with my good Father; and he was also
unwilling to part with me; but he was so impatient
to see you, and tell you the blessed Tidings, with
which his Heart overflow'd, that I could hardly wish
to detain him. 

Mrs. Jewkes brought two Bottles of Cherry-brandy,
and two Bottles of Cinamon-water, and
some Cake; and they were put up in the Portmanteau,
with my Father's newly presented Cloaths; 
for he said, he would not, for any thing, be seen in
them in his Neighbourhood, till I was actually known,
by every body, to be marry'd; nor would he lay out
any part of the twenty Guineas till then neither, for
fear of Reflections; and then he would consult me
as to what he should buy. Well, said I, as you
please, my dear Father; and I hope now we shall
often have the Pleasure of hearing from one another,
without needing any Art or Contrivances. 
He said, he would go to-bed betimes, that he
might be up as soon as it was light; and so he took
Leave of me, and said he would not love me, if I
got up in the Morning to see him go; which would
but make us more loth to part, and grieve us both
all Day. 
Mr. Thomas brought him a Pair of Boots, and
told him, he would call him up at peep of Day, and
put up every thing over Night; and so I received his
Blessing and his Prayers, and his kind Promises of
procuring the same from you, my dear Mother, and
went up to my Closet with a heavy Heart, and yet
a half pleased one, if I may so say; for that, as he
must go, he was going to the best of Wives, and
with the best of Tidings. But I begg'd he would
not work so hard as he had done; for I was sure my
Master would not have given him twenty Guineas
for Cloaths, if he had not designed to do something
else for him; and that he should be the less concern'd
at receiving Benefits from my good Master, because
he, who had so many Persons to employ in his large
Possessions, could make him serviceable, to an equivalent
Degree, without hurting any body else. 

He promised me fair; and pray, dear Mother,
see he performs. I hope my Master will not see this. 
For I will not send it you, at present, till I can send
you the best of News; and the rather, as my dear
Father can supply the greatest Part of what I have
written, since the Papers he carries you, by his own
Observation. So, God bless you both! Good-night! 
And send my Father a safe Journey, and a happy
Meeting to you both! 