



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

From my apartments at Mrs. Moore's. 
Miss Rawlins at her brother's; Mrs. Moore engaged
in houshold matters; Widow Bevis
dressing; I have nothing to do but write. This
cursed Tomlinson not yet arrived! Nothing to be
done without him. 
I think he shall complain in pretty high language
of the treatment he met with yesterday. ‘What
are our affairs to him? He can have no view but
to serve us. Cruel, to send back to town, unaudienced, unseen, a man of his business and importance. 

He never stirs a foot, but something
of consequence depends upon his movements. A
confounded thing to trifle thus humoursomely with
such a gentleman's moments! —These women
think, that all the business of the world must stand
still for their figaries [A good female word, Jack!]: 
The greatest triflers in the creation, to fancy themselves
the most important beings in it—Marry come
up! as I have heard Goody Sorlings say to her servants,
when she has rated at them, with mingled
anger and disdain.’ 
After all, methinks I want these tostications [Thou
seest how women, and womens words, fill my mind]
to be over, happily over, that I may sit down quietly,
and reflect upon the dangers I have passed thro', and
the troubles I have undergone. I have a reflecting
mind, as thou knowest; but the very word implies,
All got over. 
What bryars and thorns does the wretch rush into
(a scratch'd face and tatter'd garments the unavoidable
consequence), who will needs be for striking out
a new path thro' overgrown underwood; quitting
that beaten out for him by those who have travelled
the same road before him! 
* *
A visit from the Widow Bevis, in my own apartment. 
She tells me, that my spouse had thoughts
last night, after I was gone to my lodgings, of removing
from Mrs. Moore's. I almost wish she had
attempted to do so. 
Miss Rawlins, it seems, who was apply'd to upon
it, dissuaded her from it. 
Mrs. Moore also, tho' she did not own that Will.
lay in the house (or rather sat up in it, courting), set
before her the difficulties, which, in her opinion,
she would have to get clear off, without my knowlege; 
assuring her, that she could be no-where safer 

than with her, till she had fixed whither to go. And
the lady herself recollected, that if she went, she
might miss the expected letter from her dear friend
Miss Howe; which, as she owned, was to direct
her future steps. 
She must also surely have some curiosity to know
what her uncle's friend had to say to her from her
uncle, contemptuously as she yesterday treated a
man of his importance. Nor could she, I should
think, be absolutely determin'd to put herself out of
the way of receiving the visits of two of the principal
ladies of my family, and to break intirely with me
in the face of them all. —Besides, whither could she
have gone? —Moreover, Miss Howe's letter coming,
after her elopement, so safely to her hands, must
surely put her into a more confiding temper with me,
and with every one else, tho' she would not immediately
own it. 
But these good folks have so little charity! —Are
such severe censurers! —Yet who is absolutely perfect? 
—It were to be wished, however, that they
would be so modest as to doubt themselves sometimes: 
Then would they allow for others, as others
(excellent as they imagine themselves to be) must
for them. 
Saturday, one o'clock. 
Tomlinson at last is come. Forced to ride five
miles about (tho' I shall impute his delay to great
and important business) to avoid the sight of two or
three impertinent rascals, who, little thinking whose
affairs he was employ'd in, wanted to obtrude
themselves upon him. I think I will make this fellow
easy, if he behave to my liking in this affair. 
I sent up the moment he came. 
She desired to be excused receiving his visit till
four this afternoon. 
Intolerable! —No consideration! —None at all in 

this sex, when their cursed humours are in the way! 
—Pay-day, pay-hour, rather, will come! —O that
it were to be the next! 
The Captain is in a pet. Who can blame him? 
Even the women think a man of his consequence,
and generously coming to serve us, hardly used. 
Would to heaven she had attempted to get off last
night: The women not my enemies, who knows
but the husband's exerted authority might have met
with such connivance, as might have concluded either
in carrying her back to her former lodgings, or
in consummation at Mrs. Moore's, in spite of exclamations,
fits, and the rest of the female obsecrations? 
My beloved has not appeared to any-body this
day, except to Mrs. Moore. Is, it seems, extremely
low: Unfit for the interesting conversation that is to
be held in the afternoon. Longs to hear from her
dear friend Miss Howe—Yet cannot expect a letter
for a day or two. Has a bad opinion of all mankind. 
—No wonder! —Excellent creature as she is!
with such a father, such uncles, such a brother, as
she has! 
How does she look? 
Better than could be expected from yesterday's fatigue,
and last night's ill rest. 
These tender doves know not, till put to it, what
they can bear; especially when engaged in love-affairs; 
and their attention wholly engrossed. But
the sex love busy scenes. Still-life is their aversion. 
A woman will create a storm, rather than be without
one. So as they can preside in the whirlwind, and
direct it, they are happy. —But my beloved's misfortune
is, that she must live in tumults; yet neither
raise them herself, nor be able to controul them. 