



Colonel Morden, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sunday Night, Sept. 10. 
Dear Sir,
According to my promise, I send you an account of
matters here. Poor Mrs. Norton was so very ill
upon the road, that, slowly as the herse moved, and
the chariot followed, I was afraid we should not have
got her to St. Alban's. We put up there as I had intended. 
I was in hopes that she would have been better
for the stop: But I was forced to leave her behind me. 
I ordered the servant-maid you were so considerately
kind as to send down with her, to be very careful of
her; and left the chariot to attend her. She deserves all
the regard that can be paid her; not only upon my
Cousin's account, but on her own—She is an excellent
woman. 
When we were within five miles of Harlowe-Place,
I put on a hand-gallop. I ordered the herse to proceed
more slowly still, the cross-road we were in being
rough; and having more time before us than I wanted; 
for I wished not the herse to be in till near dusk. 
I got to Harlowe-Place about Four o'clock. You
may believe I found a mournful house. You desire me
to be very minute. 
At my entrance into the court, they were all in motion. 
Every servant whom I saw had swelled eyes, and
looked with so much concern, that at first I apprehended
some new disaster had happened in the family. 
Mr. John and Mr. Antony Harlowe and Mrs. Hervey
were there. They all helped on one another's grief,
as they had before done each other's hardness of heart. 
My Cousin James met me at the entrance of the
hall. His countenance expressed a fixed concern; and
he desired me to excuse his behaviour the last time I
was there. 
My Cousin Arabella came to me full of tears and grief. 

O Cousin! said she, hanging upon my arm, I dare
not ask you any questions!— 
About the approach of the herse, I suppose she meant. 
I myself was full of grief; and without going farther
or speaking, sat down in the hall in the first chair. 
The Brother sat down on one hand of me, the Sister
on the other. Both were silent. The latter in tears. 
Mr. Antony Harlowe came to me soon after. His
face was overspread with all the appearance of woe. He
requested me to walk into the parlour; where, as he
said, were all his fellow-mourners. 
I attended him in. My Cousins James and Arabella
followed me. 
A perfect concert of grief, as I may say, broke out
the moment I entered the parlour. 
My Cousin Harlowe, the dear creature's Father, as
soon as he saw me, said, O Cousin, Cousin, of all our
family, you are the only one who have nothing to reproach
yourself with! —You are a happy man! 
The poor Mother bowing her head to me in speechless
grief, sat with her handkerchief held to her eyes,
with one hand. The other hand was held by her Sister
Hervey, between both hers; Mrs. Hervey weeping
upon it. 
Near the window sat Mr. John Harlowe, his face
and his body turned from the sorrowing company; his
eyes red and swelled. 
My Cousin Antony, at his re-entering the parlour,
went towards Mrs. Harlowe—Don't—dear Sister, said
he! —Then towards my Cousin Harlowe—Don't—dear
Brother! —Don't thus give way—And without being
able to say another word, went to a corner of the parlour,
and, wanting himself the comfort he would fain
have given, sunk into a chair, and audibly sobbed. 
Miss Arabella followed her Uncle Antony, as he
walked in before me; and seemed as if she would have
spoken to the pierced Mother some words of comfort. 
But she was unable to utter them, and got behind her 

Mother's chair; and inclining her face over it on the
unhappy Lady's shoulder, seemed to claim the consolation
that indulgent parent used, but then was unable
to afford her. 
Young Mr. Harlowe with all his vehemence of spirit
was now subdued. His self-reproaching conscience, no
doubt, was the cause of it. 
And what, Sir, must their thoughts be, which, at
that moment, in a manner deprived them of all motion,
and turned their speech into sighs and groans! —How
to be pitied, how greatly to be pitied, and of them! But
how much to be cursed that abhorred Lovelace, who,
as it seems, by arts uncommon, and a villainy without
example, has been the sole author of a woe so complicated
and extensive! —God judge me, as—But I stop— 
The man (the man can I say?) is your friend! —He
already suffers, you tell me, in his intellect—Restore
him, Heaven, to That—If I find the matter come out,
as I apprehend it will—Indeed her own hint of his usage
of her, as in her Will, is enough—Nor think, my beloved
Cousin, thou darling of my heart! that thy gentle
spirit, breathing charity and forgiveness to the vilest of
men, shall avail him! 
But once more I stop—Forgive me, Sir! —Who
could behold such a scene, who could recollect it in order
to describe it (as minutely as you wished me to relate
how this unhappy family were affected on this sad occasion)
every one of the mourners nearly related to himself,
and not be exasperated against the author of all? 
As I was the only person (grieved as I was myself)
from whom any of them, at that instant, could derive
comfort; Let us not, said I, my dear Cousin, approaching
the inconsolable Mother, give way to a grief, which
however just, can now avail tis nothing. We hurt ourselves,
and cannot recall the dear creature for whom we
mourn. Nor would you wish it, if you knew with what
assurances of eternal happiness she left the world. —She 

is happy, Madam! —Depend upon it, she is happy! 
And comfort yourselves with that assurance. 
O Cousin, Cousin! cried the unhappy Mother, withdrawing
her hand from that of her Sister Hervey, and
pressing mine with it, You know not what a Child I
have lost! —Then in a lower voice, And how lost! — 
That it is that makes the loss insupportable. 
They all joined in a kind of melancholy chorus, and
each accused him and herself, and some of them one another. 
But the eyes of all, in turn, were cast upon
my Cousin James as the person who had kept up the
general resentment against so sweet a creature. While
he was hardly able to bear his own remorse: Nor Miss
Harlowe hers; she breaking out into words, How tauntingly
did I write to her! How barbarously did I insult
her! Yet how patiently did she take it! —Who would
have thought that she had been so near her end! —O
Brother, Brother! —But for you! —But for you!— 
Double not upon me, said he, my own woes! —I have
every-thing before me that has passed! —I thought only
to reclaim a dear creature that had erred! I intended
not to break her tender heart! —But it was the villainous
Lovelace who did that—Not any of us! —Yet, Cousin,
did she not attribute all to me? —I fear she did! —Tell
me only, did she name me, did she speak of me, in her
last hours? I hope she, who could forgive the greatest
villain on earth, and plead that he may be safe from our
vengeance; I hope she could forgive me. 
She died blessing you all; and justified rather than
condemned your severity to her. 
Then they set up another general lamentation. We
see, said her Father, Enough we see in her heart-piercing
Letters to us, what a happy frame she was in
a few days before her death—But did it hold to the last? 
Had she no repinings? Had the dear child no heart-burnings? 
None at all! —I never saw, and never shall see, so
blessed a departure: And no wonder; for I never heard 

of such a preparation. Every hour for weeks together
was taken up in it. Let this be our comfort: We need
only to wish for so happy an end for ourselves, and for
those who are nearest to our hearts. We may any of us
be grieved for acts of unkindness to her: But had all
happened that once she wished for, she could not have
made a happier, perhaps not so happy an end. 
Dear Soul! and dear sweet Soul! the Father, Uncles,
Sister, my Cousin Hervey, cried out all at once
in accents of anguish inexpressibly affecting. 
We must for ever be disturbed for those acts of unkindness
to so sweet a child, cried the unhappy Mother! 
—Indeed! indeed! [softly to her Sister Hervey] I have
been too passive, much too passive, in this case! —The
temporary quiet I have been so studious all my life to
preserve, has cost me everlasting disquiet!— 
There she stopt. 
Dear Sister! was all Mrs. Hervey could say. 
I have done but half my duty to the dearest and most
meritorious of children, resumed the sorrowing Mother! 
—Nay, not half! —How have we hardened our hearts
against her!— 
Again her tears denied passage to her words. 
My dearest, dearest Sister! again was all Mrs. Hervey
could say. 
Would to Heaven, proceeded, exclaiming, the poor
Mother, I had but once seen her! Then turning to my
Cousin James and his Sister—O my Son! O my Arabella! 
If WE were to receive as little mercy— 
And there again she stopt, her tears interrupting her
further speech: Every one, all the time, remaining silent; 
their countenances shewing a grief in their hearts
too big for expression. 
Now you see, Mr. Belford, that my dearest Cousin
could be allowed all her merit! —What a dreadful thing
is after-reflection upon a conduct so perverse and unnatural? 
O this cursed friend of yours, Mr. Belford! This detested
Lovelace! —To him, To him is owing— 

Pardon me, Sir. I will lay down my pen till I have
recovered my temper. 
One in the Morning. 
In vain, Sir, have I endeavoured to compose myself
to rest. You wished me to be very particular, and I
cannot help it. This melancholy subject fills my whole
mind. I will proceed, tho' it be midnight. 
About Six o'clock the herse came to the outward
gate—The parish-church is at some distance; but the
wind sitting fair, the afflicted family were struck, just
before it came, into a fresh fit of grief, on hearing the
Funeral Bell tolled in a very solemn manner. A respect,
as it proved, and as they all guessed, paid to the memory
of the dear deceased out of officious love, as the herse
passed near the church. 
Judge, when their grief was so great in expectation
of it, what it must be when it arrived. 
A servant came in to acquaint us with what its lumbering
heavy noise up the paved inner Court-yard apprised
us of before. 
He spoke not. He could not speak. He looked,
bowed, and withdrew. 
I stept out. No one else could then stir. Her Brother,
however, soon followed me. 
When I came to the door, I beheld a sight very affecting. 
You have heard, Sir, how universally my dear Cousin
was beloved. By the poor and middling sort especially,
no young Lady was ever so much beloved. And
with reason: She was the common patroness of all the
honest poor in her neighbourhood. 
It is natural for us in every deep and sincere grief to
interest all we know in what is so concerning to ourselves. 
The servants of the family, it seems, had told
their friends, and those theirs, that tho', living, their
dear young Lady could not be received nor looked upon,
her body was permitted to be brought home. The space
of time was so confined, that those who knew when she 

died, must easily guess near the time the herse was to
come. A herse, passing thro' country villages, and
from London, however slenderly attended (for the chariot,
as I have said, waited upon poor Mrs. Norton)
takes every one's attention. Nor was it hard to guess
whose this must be, tho' not adorned by escutcheons,
when the cross-roads to Harlowe-Place were taken, as
soon as it came within six miles of it: so that the herse,
and the solemn Tolling of the Pell, had drawn together
at least fifty of the neighbouring men, women, and
children, and some of good appearance. Not a soul of
them, it seems, with a dry eye; and each lamenting
the death of this admired Lady, who, as I am told,
never stirred out, but somebody was the better for her. 
These, when the coffin was taken out of the herse,
crouding about it, hindered, for a few moments, its
being carried in; the young people struggling who
should bear it; and yet with respectful whisperings, rather
than clamorous contention. A mark of veneration
I had never before seen paid, upon any occasion, in all
my travels, from the under-bred Many, from whom
noise is generally inseparable in all their emulations. 
At last Six maidens were permitted to carry it in by
the Six handles. 
The corpse was thus borne, with the most solemn
respect, into the hall, and placed for the present upon
two stools there. The plates, and emblems, and inscription,
set every one gazing upon it, and admiring
it. The more, when they were told, that all was of
her own ordering. They wished to be permitted a sight
of the corpse; but rather mentioned this as their wish
than as their hope. When they had all satisfied their
curiosity, and remarked upon the emblems, they dispersed
with blessings upon her memory, and with tears
and lamentations; pronouncing her to be happy; and
inferring, were She not so, what would become of
Them? While others ran over with repetitions of the
good she delighted to do. Nor were there wanting 

those among them, who heaped curses upon the man
who was the author of her fall. 
The servants of the family then got about the coffin. 
They could not before: And that afforded a new scene
of sorrow: But a silent one; for they spoke only by
their eyes, and by sighs, looking upon the lid, and upon
one another, by turns, with hands lifted up. The presence
of their young master possibly might awe them,
and cause their grief to be expressed only in dumb shew. 
As for Mr. James Harlowe (who accompanied me,
but withdrew when he saw the croud) he stood looking
upon the lid, when the people had left it, with a fixed
attention: Yet, I dare say, knew not a symbol or letter
upon it at that moment, had the question been asked
him. In a profound reverie he stood, his arms folded,
his head on one side, and marks of stupefaction imprinted
upon every feature. 
But when the corpse was carried into the lesser parlour,
adjoining to the hall, which she used to call her
parlour, and put upon a table in the middle of the room,
and the Father and Mother, the two Uncles, her Aunt
Hervey, and her Sister, came in, joining her Brother
and me, with trembling feet, and eager woe, the scene
was still more affecting. Their sorrow was heightened,
no doubt, by the remembrance of their unforgiving severity: 
And now seeing before them the receptacle that
contained the glory of their family, who so lately was
driven thence by their indiscreet violence; never, never
more to be restored to them! no wonder that their grief
was more than common grief. 
They would have with-held the Mother, it seems,
from coming in: But when they could not, tho' undetermined
before, they all bore her company, led on by
an impulse they could not resist. The poor Lady but
just cast her eye upon the coffin, and then snatched it
away, retiring with passionate grief towards the window; 
yet addressing herself, with clasped hands, as if to her
beloved daughter; O my Child, my Child! cried she; 

thou pride of my hope! Why was I not permitted to
speak pardon and peace to thee! —O forgive thy cruel
Mother! 
Her Son (his heart then softened, as his eyes shewed)
besought her to withdraw: And her woman looking in
at that moment, he called her to assist him in conducting
her Lady into the middle parlour: And then returning,
met his Father going out at the door, who
also had but just cast his eye on the coffin, and yielded
to my entreaties to withdraw. 
His grief was too deep for utterance, till he saw his
Son coming in; and then, fetching a heavy groan,
Never, said he, was sorrow like my sorrow! —O Son!
Son!—in a reproaching accent, his face turned from
him. 
I attended him thro' the middle parlour, endeavouring
to console him. His Lady was there in agonies. 
She took his eye. He made a motion towards her: O
my dear, said he—But turning short, his eyes as full as
his heart, he hastened thro' to the great parlour: And
when there, he desired me to leave him to himself. 
The Uncles and the Sister looked and turned away,
looked and turned away, very often upon the emblems,
in silent sorrow. Mrs. Hervey would have read to them
the inscription—These words she did read, Here the
wicked cease from troubling—But could read no farther. 
Her tears fell in large drops upon the plate she was contemplating; 
and yet she was desirous of gratifying a
curiosity that mingled impatience with her grief because
she could not gratify it, altho' she often wiped her eyes
as they flowed. 
Judge you, Mr. Belford (for you have great humanity)
how I must be affected. Yet was I forced to try
to comfort them All. 
But here I will close this Letter, in order to send it
to you in the morning early. Nevertheless, I will begin
another, upon supposition that my doleful prolixity will
not be disagreeable to you. Indeed I am altogether indisposed 

for rest, as I mentioned before. So can do nothing
but write. I have also more melancholy scenes
to paint. My pen, if I may so say, is untired. These
scenes are fresh upon my memory: And I myself, perhaps,
may owe to you the favour of a review of them,
with such other papers as you shall think proper to
oblige me with, when heavy grief has given way to milder
melancholy. 
My servant, in his way to you with this Letter, shall
call at St. Alban's upon the good woman, that he may
inform you how she does. Miss Arabella asked me after
her, when I withdrew to my chamber; to which she
complaisantly accompanied me. She was much concerned
at the bad way we left her in; and said her Mother
would be more so. 
No wonder that the dear departed, who foresaw the
remorse that would fall to the lot of this unhappy family
when they came to have the news of her death confirmed
to them, was so grieved for their apprehended
grief, and endeavoured to comfort them by her posthumous
Letters. But it was still a greater generosity in her to
try to excuse them to me, as she did when we were
alone together, a few hours before she died; and to aggravate
more than (as far as I can find) she ought to
have done, the only error she was ever guilty of. The
more freely however perhaps (exalted creature!) that I
might think the better of her friends, although at her
own expence. I am, dear Sir, 
Your faithful and obedient Servant,
Wm. Morden. 