



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

The Ladies, instead of taking up the subject where
we had laid it down, must needs touch upon passages
in my fair accuser's letter, which I was in hopes they
would have let rest, as we were in a tolerable way. But,
truly, they must hear all they could hear, of our story,
and what I had to say to those passages, that they might
be better enabled to mediate between us, if I were really
and indeed inclined to do her the hoped-for justice. 
These passages were, 1st, “That after I had trick'd
her, against her will, into the act of going off with me,
I carried her to one of the worst houses in London.” 
2, “That I had made a wicked attempt upon her; in
resentment of which, she fled to Hamstead, privately. 
3dly, Came the forgery, and personating charge
again; and we were upon the point of renewing our
quarrel, before we could get to the next charge: Which
was still worse. 

For that, 4thly, was, “That having trick'd her back
to the vile house, I had first robbed her of her senses,
and then of her honour; detaining her afterwards a
prisoner there.” 
Were I to tell thee the glosses I put upon these heavy
charges, what would it be, but to repeat many of the
extenuating arguments I have used in my letters to thee? 
–––Suffice it, therefore, to say, that I insisted much, by way
of palliation, on the lady's extreme niceness: On her
diffidence in my honour: On Miss Howe's contriving
spirit; plots on their parts, begetting plots on mine: On
the high passions of the sex: I asserted, that my whole
view, in gently restraining her, was to oblige her to forgive
me, and to marry me; and this, for the honour of
both families. I boasted of my own good qualities; some
of which none that know me, deny; and which few
libertines can lay claim to. 
They then fell into warm admirations and praises of
the lady; all of them preparatory, as I knew, to the grand
question: And thus it was introduced by Lady Sarah. 
We have said as much as I think we can say, upon these
letters of the poor lady. To dwell upon the mischiefs
that may ensue from the abuse of a person of her rank, if
all the reparation be not made, that now can be made,
would perhaps be to little purpose. But you seem, Sir, still
to have a just opinion of her, as well as affection for her. 
Her virtue is not in the least questionable. She could not
resent as she does, had she any thing to reproach herself
with. She is, by every-body's account, a fine woman; 
has a good estate in her own right; is of no contemptible
family; tho' I think with regard to her, they have acted
as imprudently as unworthily. For the excellency of her
mind, for good oeconomy, the common speech of her,
as the worthy Dr. Lewin once told me, is, That her
prudence would enrich a poor man, and her piety reclaim a
licentious one. I, who have not been abroad twice this
twelvemonth, came hither purposely, so did Lady Betty, to
see if justice may not be done her; and also whether we,
and my Lord M. (your nearest relations, Sir) have, or have
not, any influence over you. And, for my own part, as
your determination shall be in this article, such shall be 

mine, with regard to the disposition of all that is
within my power. 
Lady Betty. And mine. 
And mine, said my Lord: And valiantly he swore to it. 
Lovel. Far be it from me to think slightly of favours
you may any of you be glad I would deserve. But as far
be it from me to enter into conditions against my own
liking, with sordid views! —As to future mischiefs, let them
come. I have not done with the Harlowes yet. They
were the aggressors; and I should be glad they would let
me hear from them, in the way they should hear from
me, in the like case. Perhaps, I should not be sorry to
be found, rather than be obliged to seek, on this occasion. 
Miss Charlotte [reddening]. Spoke like a man of violence,
rather than a man of reason! I hope you'll allow
that, cousin. 
Lady Sarah. Well, but since what is done, is done, and
cannot be undone, let us think of the next best. Have
you any objection against marrying Miss Harlowe, if she
will have you? 
Lovel. There can possibly be but one: That she is everywhere,
no doubt, as well as to Lady Betty, pursuing that
maxim, peculiar to herself (and let me tell you, so it ought
to be), That what she cannot conceal from herself, she
will publish to all the world. 
Miss Patty. The lady, to be sure, writes this in the
bitterness of her grief, and in despair. 
And this from you, cousin Patty! –––Sweet girl! And
would you, my dear, in the like case (whispering her),
have meant no more by the like exclamations? 
I had a rap with her fan, and a blush; and from Lord M.
a reflection, That I turn'd into jest every thing they said. 
I asked, If they thought the Harlowes deserved any
consideration from me; and whether that family would
not exult over me, were I to marry their daughter, and
if I dared not to do otherwise? 
Lady Sarah. Once I was angry with that family, as we
all were. But now I pity them; and think, that you have
but too well justified the worst treatment they gave you. 
Lord M. Their family is of standing. All gentlemen
of it, and rich, and reputable. Let me tell you, that 

many of our coronets would be glad they could derive
their descents from no worse a stem than theirs. 
Lovel. They are a narrow-soul'd and implacable family. 
I hate them: And tho' I revere the lady, scorn all relation
to them. 
Lady Betty. I wish no worse could be said of him, who
is such a scorner of common failings in others. 
Lord M. How would my sister Lovelace have reproached
herself for all her indulgent folly to this favourite boy of
hers, had she lived till now, and been present on this
occasion! 
Lady Sarah. Well but, begging your Lordship's pardon,
let us see if any thing can be done for this poor lady. 
Miss Ch. If Mr. Lovelace has nothing to object against
the lady's character (and I presume to think he is not
asham'd to do her justice, tho' it may make against himself),
I cannot see, but honour, and generosity, will compel
from him all that we expect. If there be any levities,
any weaknesses, to be charg'd upon the lady, I should not
open my lips in her favour; tho' in private I would pity
her, and deplore her hard hap. And yet, even then,
there might not want arguments, from honour and gratitude,
in so particular a case, to engage you, Sir, to make
good the vows it is plain you have broken. 
Lady Betty. My niece Charlotte has called upon you
so justly, and has put the question to you so properly,
that I cannot but wish you would speak to it directly, and
without evasion. 
All in a breath then bespoke my seriousness, and my
justice: And in this manner I deliver'd myself, assuming
an air sincerely solemn. 
“I am very sensible, that the performance of the task
you have put me upon, will leave me without excuse: 
But I will not have recourse either to evasion, or palliation. 
“As my cousin Charlotte has severely observ'd, I am
not asham'd to do justice to Miss Harlowe's merit in
words, altho' I will confess, that I ought to blush that
I have done it so little in deeds. 
“I own to you all, and, what is more, with high regret
(if not with shame, cousin Charlotte), that I have a 

great deal to answer for in my usage of this lady. 
The Sex has not a nobler mind, nor a lovelier person of
it. And, for virtue, I could not have believed (excuse
me, Ladies) that there ever was a woman who gave, or
could have given, such illustrious, such uniform proofs of
it: For, in her whole conduct, she has shewn herself
to be equally above temptation and art; and, I had
almost said, human frailty. 
“The step she so freely blames herself for taking, was
truly what she calls compulsatory: For tho' she was provoked
to think of going off with me, she intended it
not, nor was provided to do so: Neither would she
ever have had the thought of it, had her relations left
her free, upon her offer'd composition, to renounce the
man she did not hate, in order to avoid the man she did. 
“It piqu'd my pride, I own, that I could so little depend
upon the force of those impressions, which I had
the vanity to hope I had made in a heart so delicate; 
and in my worst devices against her, I encouraged myself,
that I abused no confidence; for none had she in
my honour. 
“The evils she has suffer'd, it would have been more
than a miracle had she avoided.  Her watchfulness
render'd more plots abortive, than those which contributed
to her fall; and they were many and various. 
And all her greater trials and hardships were owing
to her noble resistance and just resentment. 
“I know, proceeded I, how much I condemn myself
in the justice I am doing to this excellent creature. 
But yet I will do her justice, and cannot help it if I
would. And I hope this shews, that I am not so totally
abandon'd, as I have been thought to be. 
“Indeed with me, she has done more honour to the
Sex in her fall, if it be to be called a fall (In truth it
ought not), than ever any other could do in her standing. 
“When, at length, I had given her watchful virtue
cause of suspicion, I was then indeed obliged to make
use of power and art to hinder her from escaping from
me. She then formed contrivances to elude mine; but 

all hers were such as strict truth and punctilious honour
would justify. She could not stoop to deceit and
falshood, no, not to save herself. More than once,
justly did she tell me, fired by conscious worthiness,
that her soul was my soul's superior! –––Forgive me,
Ladies, for saying, that till I knew her, I question'd a
Soul in a Sex, created, as I was willing to suppose, only
for temporary purposes. –––It is not to be imagin'd into
what absurdities men of free principles run, in order to
justify to themselves their free practices; and to make
a religion to their minds: And yet, in this respect, I
have not been so faulty as some others. 
“No wonder that such a noble creature as this looked
upon every studied artifice, as a degree of baseness, not
to be forgiven: No wonder that she could so easily
become averse to the man (tho' once she beheld
him with an eye not wholly indifferent) whom she
thought capable of premeditated guilt. –––Nor, give me
leave, on the other hand, to say, is it to be wonder'd at,
that the man who found it so difficult to be forgiven,
for the slighter offences, and who had not the grace to
recede or repent (made desperate), should be hurried
on to the commission of the greater. 
“In short, Ladies, in a word, my Lord, Miss Clarissa
Harlowe is an angel; if ever there was or could
be one in human nature: And is, and ever was, as
pure as an angel in her will: And this justice I must do
her, altho' the question, I see by every glistening eye,
is ready to be asked, What, then, Lovelace, are you?––” 
Lord M. A devil! –––A damn'd devil! I must answer. 
And may the curse of God follow you in all you undertake,
if you do not make her the best amends now in
your power to make her! 
Lovel. From you, my Lord, I could expect no other: 
But from the Ladies, I hope for less violence from the ingenuity
of my confession. 
The Ladies, elder and younger, had their handkerchiefs
to their eyes, at the just testimony which I bore to the
merits of this exalted creature; and which I would make
no scruple to bear at the Bar of a Court of Justice, were
I to be called to it. 

Lady Betty. Well, Sir, this is a noble character. If
you think as you speak, surely you cannot refuse to do
the lady all the justice now in your power to do her. 
They all joined in this demand. 
I pleaded, that I was sure she would not have me: 
That, when she had taken a resolution, she was not to be
moved: Unpersuadableness was an Harlowe sin: That,
and her name, I told them, were all she had of theirs. 
All were of opinion, that she might, in her present
desolate circumstances, be brought to forgive me. Lady
Sarah said, that her sister and she would endeavour to find
out the Noble Sufferer, as they justly called her; and
would take her into their protection, and be guaranties
to her of the justice that I would do her; as well after marriage,
as before. 
It was some pleasure to me, to observe the placability
of these ladies of my own family, had they, any or either
of them, met with a Lovelace. But 'twould be hard upon
us honest fellows, Jack, if all women were Clarissa's. 
Here I am obliged to break off. 