



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. Noon, June 21. 
What shall I say now! —I, who but a few hours
ago had such faith in dreams, and had proposed
out of hand to begin my treatise of Dreams sleeping and
Dreams waking, and was pleasing myself with the dialoguings
between the old matronly Lady, and the young
Lady; and with the two metamorphoses (absolutely assured
that every-thing would happen as my dream
chalked it out); shall never more depend upon those flying
follies, those illusions of a fancy depraved, and run
mad. 
Thus confoundedly have matters happened. 

I went out at Eight o'clock in high good humour
with myself, in order to give the sought-for opportunity
to the plotting mistress and corrupted maid; only ordering
Will, and to keep a good look-out for fear his Lady
should mistrust my plot, or mistake a Hackney-coach
for the dowager Lady's chariot. But first I sent to know
how she did; and received for answer, Very ill: —Had
a very bad night: Which letter was but too probable: 
Since This I know, that people who have plots in their
heads as seldom have as deserve good ones. 
I desired a physician might be called in; but was refused. 
I took a walk in St. James's Park, congratulating
myself all the way on my rare inventions: Then, impatient,
I took coach, with one of the windows quite
up, the other almost up, playing at bo-peep at every
chariot I saw pass in my way to Lincoln's-inn-fields: 
And when arrived there, I sent the coachman to desire
any one of Mother H's family to come to me to the
coach-side, not doubting but I should have intelligence
of my fair fugitive there; it being then half an hour
after ten. 
A servant came, who gave me to understand, that
the matronly Lady was just returned by herself in the
chariot. 
Frighted out of my wits, I alighted, and heard from
the Mother's own mouth, that Dorcas had engaged her
to protect the Lady; but came to tell her afterwards,
that she had changed her mind, and would not quit the
house. 
Quite astonished, not knowing what might have happened,
I ordered the coachman to lash away to our
mother's. 
Arriving here in an instant, the first word I asked,
was, If the Lady were safe? 
Mr. Lovelace gives here a very circumstantial relation of
all that passed between the Lady and Dorcas. But as 

he could only guess at her motives for refusing to go off,
when Dorcas told her, that she had engaged for her the
protection of the dowager Lady, it is thought proper to
omit his relation, and to supply it by some memoranda
of the Lady's. But is first necessary to account for
the occasion on which those memoranda were made. 
The Reader may remember, that in the Letter written to
Miss Howe on her escape to Hamstead (a)  she promises
to give her the particulars of her flight at leisure. 
She had indeed thoughts of continuing her account of everything
that had passed between her and Mr. Lovelace,
since her last Narrative Letter. But the uncertainty
she was in from that time, with the execrable treatment
she met with on her being deluded back again; followed
by a week's delirium; had hitherto hindered her
from prosecuting her intention. But, nevertheless,
having it still in her view to perform her promise as
soon as she had opportunity, she made minutes of everything
as it passed, in order to help her memory: — 
‘Which, as she observes in one place, she could less
trust to since her late disorders than before.’ 
In these minutes, or book of memoranda, she observes,
‘That having apprehensions, that Dorcas might be
a traitress, she would have got away while she was
gone out to see for a coach; and actually slid downstairs
with that intent. But that, seeing Mrs. Sinclair
in the Entry [whom Dorcas had planted there
while she went out] she speeded up again, unseen.’ 
She then went up to the dining-room, and saw the Letter
of Captain Tomlinson: On which she observes in her
memorandum-book as follows. 
‘How am I puzzled now! —He might leave this
Letter on purpose: None of the other papers left with
it being of any consequence: —What is the alternative? 
—To stay, and be the wife of the vilest of men— 

How my heart resists that! —To attempt to get off,
and fail, ruin inevitable! —Dorcas may betray me! — 
I doubt she is still his implement! —At his going out,
he whispered her, as I saw, unobserved—In a very
familiar manner too—Never fear, Sir, with a courtesy. 
‘In her agreeing to connive at my escape, she provided
not for her own safety, if I got away: Yet had
reason, in that case, to expect his vengeance. And
wants not forethought. —To have taken her with me,
was to be in the power of her intelligence, if a faithless
creature. —Let me, however, tho' I part not
with my caution, keep my charity! —Can there be
any woman so vile to woman? —O yes! Mrs. Sinclair: 
Her Aunt. —The Lord deliver me! —But,
alas! I have put myself out of the course of his protection
by the natural means—And am already ruined! 
A Father's Curse likewise against me! Having made
vain all my friends cautions and solicitudes, I must
not hope for miracles in my favour! 
‘If I do escape, what may become of me, a poor,
helpless, deserted creature! —Helpless from Sex! — 
From Circumstances! —Exposed to every danger! — 
Lord protect me! 
‘His vile man not gone with him! —Lurking hereabouts,
no doubt, to watch my steps! —I will not go
away by the chariot, however. 
* *
‘That this chariot should come so opportunely! 
So like his many opportunelies! —That Dorcas should
have the sudden thought! Should have the courage
with the thought, to address a Lady in behalf of an
absolute stranger to that Lady! That the Lady should
so readily consent! Yet the transaction between them
to take up so much time, their distance in degree considered: 
For, arduous as the case was, and precious
as the time, Dorcas was gone above half an hour! 

Yet the chariot was said to be ready at a Grocer's not
many doors off! 
Indeed some Elderly Ladies are talkative: And there
are, no doubt, some good people in the world— 
‘But that it should chance to be a widow Lady,
who could do what she pleased! That Dorcas
should know her to be so by the Lozenge! Persons in
her station not usually so knowing, I believe, in Heraldry. 
‘Yet some may! for servants are fond of deriving
collateral honours and distinctions, as I may call them,
from the quality, or people of rank, whom they serve. 
But his sly servant not gone with him! Then this
Letter of Tomlinson!— 
‘Altho' I am resolved never to have this wretch,
yet, may I not throw myself into my Uncle's protection at
Kentish-town or Highgate, if I cannot escape before; 
and so get clear of him? May not the evil I know,
be less than what I may fall into, if I can avoid further
villainy? Further villainy he has not yet threatened; 
freely and justly as I have treated him! —I will
not go, I think. At least, unless I can send this fellow
out of the way (a) . 
* *
‘The fellow a villain! The wench, I doubt, a vile
wench. At last concerned for her own safety. Plays
off and on about a coach. 
‘All my hopes of getting off, at present, over! — 
Unhappy creature! to what further evils art thou reserved! 
O how my heart rises, at the necessity I must
still be under to see and converse with so very vile a
man!’ 