



My dear Miss Darnford,
I hear that Mrs. Jewkes is in no good State of
Health. I am very sorry for it. I pray for
her Life, that she may be a Credit (if it please
God) to the Penitence she has so lately assumed. — 
For if she die, it will look discouraging to some
thoughtless Minds, who penetrate not the Methods. 
Providence takes with its poor Creatures, that as
soon as she had changed her Manner of Living,
and was in a reformed State, she was taken away:
Tho' 'tis certain, that a Person is fittest to die, when
worthiest to live. And what a Mercy will it be to
her, if she should not live long, that she saw her
Errors, and repented before 'twas too late? 
Do, my dear good Miss; vouchsafe to the poor
Soul the Honour of a Visit: She may be low-spirited
—She may be too much sunk with the Recollection
of past Things—Comfort, with that
Sweetness which is so natural to Miss Darnford, her
drooping Heart, and let her know, that I have a
true Concern for her, and give it her in Charge 

to take care of herself, and spare nothing that will
administer either to her Health or Peace of Mind. 
You'll pardon me, my dear Miss, that I put you
upon such an Office; an Office indeed unsuitable
from a Lady in your Station, to one in hers; but not
to your Piety and Charity, where a Duty so eminent
as that of visiting the Sick, and chearing the
doubting Mind, is in the Question. 
I know your Condescension will give her great
Comfort, and if she should be hastening to her
Account, what a Pleasure will it give such a Lady
as you, to have illuminated a benighted Mind, when
it was tottering on the Verge of Life! 
But I hope she will get the better of her Indisposition,
and live many Years a thankful Monument
of God's Mercies, and to do more Good by her
Example in the latter Part of her Life, than she
may possibly have done Evil in the former. 
I know she will want no spiritual Help from good
Mr. Peters; but then the kind Notice of so generally
esteem'd a young Lady, will raise her more
than can be imagined; for there is a Tenderness, a
Sympathy, in the good Persons of our Sex to one
another, that (while the best of the other seem but
to act as in Office, saying to one those Things,
which, tho' edifying and convincing, one is not certain
proceeds not rather from the Fortitude of their
Minds, than the Tenderness of their Natures) mingles
from Sex to Sex with one's very Spirits, thins
the animal Mass, and runs thro' one's Heart, in the
same lify Current (I can't cloathe my Thought
suitably to express what I would express) giving
Assurance as well as Pleasure in the most arduous
Cases, and brightening our misty Prospects, till we
see the Sun of Righteousness rising on the Hills of
Comfort, and dispelling the heavy Fogs of Doubt
and Diffidence. 

This it is makes me wish and long as I do, for
the Company of my dear Miss Darnford. O when
shall I see you? When shall I? —To speak to
Circumstance, it is all I long for; and, pardon my
Freedom of Expression, as well as Thought, when
I let you know in this Instance, how early I experience
the ardent Longings of one in the Way I
am in. 
But I ought not to set my Heart upon any thing
that is not in my own Power, and which may be
subject to Accidents, and the Controul of others. 
But, let whatever Interventions happen, so I have
your Will to come, I must be rejoiced in your
kind Intention, altho' your Power should not prove
answerable. 
And now, my dearest honoured Mother, let me
tell you, that I build no small Consolation in the
Hope, that I shall; on a certain Occasion, have your
Presence, and be strengthened by your Advice and
Comfortings. For this was a Proposal of the best
and most considerate of Gentlemen, who is every
Day, if he but sees the least Thoughtfulness upon
my Brow, studying to say or to do something to dispel
it. But I believe it is the grateful Sense I have of
his Goodness to me, that makes me thus over-anxious:
For the Apprehensions of a Separation from
such an excellent Husband, from Hopes so chearing,
Prospects so delightful, must at times affect
one, let one's Affiance and Desires be ever so strong
where they ought to be preferably placed. —Then
one would live to do a little more Good, if one
might! 
I am a sad weak, apprehensive Body; to be sure I
am! How much better fitted for the Contingencies
of Life, are the gay, frolick Minds, that think
not of any thing before it comes upon them, than
such thoughtful Futurity-Pokers as me! 

But why should I trouble you, my honoured and
dear Friends, with my idle Fears and Follies—just
as if nobody was ever in my Circumstance before? 
—Yet weak and apprehensive Spirits will be
gloomily-affected sometimes; and how can one help
it? —And if I may not hope for the indulgent
Soothings of the best of Parents, and of my Miss
Darnford, in whose Bosom besides can one disburden
one's Heart, when oppressed by too great a
Weight of Thought? 
You will come, and be in the House with me,
my dear Mother, for some Time, when my best
Friend sends to you: —Won't you? —And you will
spare my dear Mother, my best of Fathers: Won't
you? —Yes, yes, I am sure ye will—And I am
sure my Miss Darnford will be with me, if she
can; and these are my Comforts. But how I run
on! —For I am so much a Novice, that— 
But I will say no more, than that I am, my honoured
Father and Mother, your ever-dutiful Daughter; 
and, my dear Miss Darnford, 
Your affectionate and obliged
P.B. 

