



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday, Four o'Clock in the Afternoon. 
I am just returned from depositing the Letter I so
lately finished, and such of Mr. Lovelace's Letters
as I had not sent you. My long Letter I found remaining
there. —So you will have both together. 
I am concerned, methinks, it is not with you. — 
But your servant cannot always be at leisure. However,
I will deposit as fast as I write. I must keep nothing
by me now; and when I write, lock myself in,
that I may not be surprised now they think I have no
pen and ink. 
I found in the usual place another Letter from this
diligent man: And by its contents, a confirmation
that nothing passes in this house but he knows it; and
that almost as soon as it passes. For this Letter must
have been written before he could have received my 

Billet; and deposited I suppose when that was taken
away; yet he compliments me in it upon asserting
myself (as he calls it) on that occasion to my Uncle and
to Mr. Solmes. 
‘He assures me, however, that they are more
and more determined to subdue me. 
‘He sends me the compliments of his family; and
acquaints me with their earnest desire to see me
amongst them. Most vehemently does he press for
my quitting This house, while it is in my power to
get away: And again craves leave to order his Uncle's
Chariot-and-six to attend my commands at the
stile leading to the coppice adjoining to the paddock. 
‘Settlements to my own will he again offers. Lord
M. and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty to be guarantees
of his honour and justice. But, if I chuse not to
go to either of those Ladies, nor yet to make him
the happiest of men so soon as it is nevertheless his
hope that I will, he urges me to withdraw to my
own house, and to accept of my Lord M. for my
guardian and protector till my Cousin Morden arrives. 
He can contrive, he says, to give me easy
possession of it, and will fill it with his female Relations
on the first invitation from me; and Mrs.
Norton, or Miss Howe, may be undoubtedly prevailed
upon to be with me for a time. There can
be no pretence for litigation, he says, when I am
once in it. Nor, if I chuse to have it so, will he
appear to visit me; nor presume to mention Marriage
to me till all is quiet and easy; till every method
I shall prescribe for a Reconciliation with my friends
is tried; till my Cousin comes; till such Settlements
are drawn as he shall approve of for me; and that I
have unexceptionable proofs of his own good behaviour.’ 
As to the disgrace a person of my character may be
apprehensive of upon quitting my Father's house, he
observes (too truly I doubt) ‘That the treatment I 

meet with is in every one's mouth: Yet, he says
that the public voice is in my favour: My friends
themselves, he says, expect that I will do myself,
what he calls, this justice: Why else do they confine
me? He urges, that, thus treated, the independence
I have a right to will be my sufficient excuse,
going but from their house to my own, if I
chuse that measure; or in order to take possession
of my own, if I do not: That all the disgrace I can
receive, they have already given me: That his concern
and his family's concern in my honour, will
be equal to my own, if he may be so happy ever to
call me his: And he presumes, he says, to aver,
that no family can better supply the loss of my own
friends to me than his, in whatever way I shall do
them the honour to accept of his and their protection. 
‘But he repeats, that, in all events, he will oppose
my being carried to my Uncle's; being well assured,
that I shall be lost to him for ever, if once I enter
into that house.’ He tells me, ‘That my Brother
and Sister, and Mr. Solmes, design to be there to
receive me: That my Father and Mother will not
come near me till the Ceremony is actually over: 
And that then they will appear, in order to try to
reconcile me to my odious Husband by urging upon
me the obligations I shall be supposed to be under
from a double duty.’ 
How, my dear, am I driven on one side, and invited
on the other! —This last intimation is but a too
probable one. All the steps they take seem to tend to
this! And, indeed, they have declared almost as much. 
He owns, ‘That he has already taken his measures
upon this intelligence: —But that he is so desirous
for my sake (I must suppose, he says, that he
owes them no forbearance for their own) to avoid
coming to extremities, that he has suffered a person,
whom they do not suspect, to acquaint them with 

his resolutions, as if come at by accident, if they
persist in their design to carry me by violence to my
Uncle's; in hopes, that they may be induced from
the fear of mischief which may ensue, to change
their measures: And yet he is aware, that he has
exposed himself to the greatest risques by having
caused this intimation to be given them; since, if
he cannot benefit himself by their fears, there is no
doubt but they will doubly guard themselves against
him upon it.’ 
What a dangerous enterprizer, however, is this man! 
‘He begs a few lines from me, by way of answer
to this Letter, either this evening, or to-morrow
morning. If he be not so favoured, he shall conclude,
from what he knows of the fixed determination
of my Relations, that I shall be under a closer
restraint than before: And he shall be obliged to
take his measures according to that presumption.’ 
You will see by this abstract, as well as by his Letter
preceding This (for both run in the same strain)
how strangely forward the difficulty of my situation
has brought him in his declarations and proposals; and
in his threatenings too: Which, but for That, I
would not take from him. 
Something, however, I must speedily resolve upon,
or it will be out of my power to help myself. 
Now I think of it, I will inclose his Letter (so
might have spared the abstract of it) that you may the
better judge of all his proposals, and intelligence; 
and lest it should fall into other hands. I cannot forget
the contents, altho' I am at a loss what answer to
return (a) . 
I cannot bear the thoughts of throwing myself upon
the protection of his friends: —But I will not examine
his proposals closely, till I hear from you. Indeed, I
have no eligible hope, but in your Mother's goodness. 

Hers is a protection I could more reputably fly to,
than to That of any other person: And from hers
should be ready to return to my Father's (for the breach
then would not be irreparable, as it would be, if I
fled to his family): To return, I repeat, on such
terms as shall secure but my Negative; not my Independence: 
I do not aim at That (so shall lay your
Mother under the less difficulty); altho' I have a right
to be put into possession of my Grandfather's Estate,
if I were to insist upon it: —Such a right, I mean, as
my Brother exerts in the Estate left him; and which
nobody disputes. —God forbid, that I should ever
think myself freed from my Father's reasonable controul,
whatever right my Grandfather's Will has
given me! He, good gentleman, left me that Estate,
as a reward of my duty, and not to set me above it,
as has been justly hinted to me: And this reflection
makes me more fearful of not answering the intention
of so valuable a bequest. —O that my friends knew but
my heart! —Would but think of it as they used to do! 
—For once more, I say, If it deceive me not, it is
not altered, altho' theirs are! 
Would but your Mother permit you to send her
chariot, or chaise, to the bye-place where Mr. Lovelace
proposes Lord M's shall come (provoked, intimidated,
and apprehensive, as I am) I would not hesitate
a moment what to do. Place me any where,
as I have said before—In a cott, in a garret; anywhere
—Disguised as a Servant—or let me pass as a
Servant's Sister—So that I may but escape Mr. Solmes
on one hand, and the disgrace of refuging with the
family of a man at enmity with my own, on the
other; and I shall be in some measure happy! — 
Should your good Mother refuse me, what refuge,
or whose, can I fly to? —Dearest creature, advise
your distressed friend. 
* *
I broke off here—I was so excessively uneasy, 

that I durst not trust myself with my own reflections: 
I therefore went down to the garden, to try to calm
my mind, by shifting the scene. I took but one turn
upon the Filbeard-walk, when Betty came to me. 
Here, Miss, is your Papa—Here is your Uncle Antony! 
—Here is my young Master—and my young
Mistress, coming, to take a walk in the garden; and
your Papa sends me to see where you are, for fear he
should meet you. 
I struck into an oblique path, and got behind the
yew-hedge, seeing my Sister appear; and there concealed
myself till they were gone past me. 
My Mother, it seems, is not well. My poor Mother
keeps her chamber. —Should she be worse, I
should have an additional unhappiness, in apprehension
that my reputed undutifulness has touched her heart. 
You cannot imagine what my emotions were behind
the yew-hedge, on seeing my Father so near me. 
I was glad to look at him thro' the hedge, as he passed
by: But I trembled in every joint, when I heard him
utter these words: Son James, To You, and to Bella,
and to You, Brother, do I wholly commit this matter. 
That I was meant, I cannot doubt. And yet,
why was I so affected; since I may be said to have
been given up to the cruelty of my Brother and Sister
for many days past? 
* *
While my Father remained in the garden, I sent
my dutiful compliments to my Mother, with enquiry
after her health, by Shorey, whom I met accidentally
upon the stairs; for none of the servants, except my
gaoleress, dare to throw themselves in my way. I had
the mortification of such a return, as made me repent
my message, tho' not my concern for her health. 
‘Let her not enquire after the disorders she occasions,’ 
was the harsh answer. ‘I will not receive
any compliments from her.’ 
Very, very, hard, my dear! Indeed it is very hard. 

* *
I have the pleasure to hear that my Mother is
already better. A colicky disorder, to which she is too
subject. It is hoped it is gone off. —God send it may! — 
Every evil that happens in this house is owing to me! 
This good news was told me, with a circumstance
very unacceptable; for Betty said, she had orders to
let me know, that my garden-walks and poultry-visits
were suspected; and that both will be prohibited,
if I stay here till Saturday or Monday. 
Possibly this is said by order, to make me go with
less reluctance to my Uncle's. 
My Mother bid her say, if I expostulated about
these orders, and about my pen and ink, ‘That reading
was more to the purpose, at present, than writeing: 
That by the one, I might be taught my duty; 
That the other, considering whom I was believed
to write to, only stiffened my will: That my needleworks
had better be pursued, than my airings; which
were observed to be taken in all weathers.’ 
So, my dear, if I do not resolve upon something
soon, I shall neither be able to avoid the intended
evil, nor have it in my power to correspond with
you. 
Wednesday Night. 
All is in a hurry below-stairs. Betty is in and
out like a spy. Something is working, I know not
what. I am really a good deal disordered in body as
well as mind. Indeed I am quite heart-sick. 
I will go down, tho' 'tis almost dark, on pretence
of getting a little air and composure. Robert has my
two former, I hope, before now: And I will deposit
This, with Lovelace's inclosed, if I can, for fear of
another search. 
I know not what I shall do! —All is so strangely
busy! —Doors clapt to—Going out of one apartment,
hurryingly, as I may say, into another. Betty
in her alarming way, staring, as if of frighted importance; 

twice with me in half an hour; called down
in haste by Shorey the last time; leaving me with
still more meaning in her looks and gestures—Yet
possibly nothing in all this worthy of my apprehensions.— 
Here again comes the creature, with her deep-drawn
affected sighs, and her O dear's! O dear's! 
* *
More dark hints thrown out by this saucy creature. 
But she will not explain herself. ‘Suppose
this pretty business ends in murder, she says? I may
rue my opposition, as long as I live, for aught she
knows. Parents will not be baffled out of their
children by impudent gentlemen; nor is it fit they
should. It may come home to me when I least
expect it.’ 
These are the gloomy and perplexing hints this impertinent
throws out. Probably they arise from the information
Mr. Lovelace says he has secretly permitted
them to have (from his vile double-faced agent, I
suppose!) of his resolution to prevent my being carried
to my Uncle's. 
How justly, if so, may This exasperate them! — 
How am I driven to and fro, like a feather in the
wind, at the pleasure of the rash, the selfish, and the
headstrong! and when I am as averse to the proceedings
of the one, as I am to those of the other! For
altho' I was induced to carry on this unhappy correspondence,
as I think I ought to call it, in hopes to
prevent mischief; yet indiscreet measures are fallen
upon by the rash man, before I, who am so much
concerned in the event of the present contentions, can
be consulted: And between his violence on one hand,
and that of my relations on the other, I find myself
in danger from both. 
&dotup;O my dear! what is worldly wisdom but the height
of folly? —I, the meanest, at least the youngest, of
my Father's family, to thrust myself in the gap 

between such uncontroulable spirits! —To the intercepting
perhaps of the designs of Providence, which
may intend to make these hostile spirits their own
punishers. —If so, what presumption! —Indeed, my
dear friend, I am afraid I have thought myself of
too much consequence. But, however this be, it
is good, when calamities befal us, that we should
look into ourselves, and fear.&dotup; 
If I am prevented depositing this and the inclosed
(as I intend to try to do, late as it is) I will add
it as occasion shall offer. Mean time, believe
to be 
Your ever-affectionate and grateful
Cl. Harlowe. 
Under the superscription, written with a pencil, after
she went down. 
‘My two former are not yet taken away. —I am
surprised—I hope you are well—I hope All is
right betwixt your Mother and you.’ 