


Miss Harriet Byron, To Mrs. Selby. 


Colnebrooke, Tuesday, March 7. 
I Have the favour of yours, and of my dear grandmamma's,
just brought me. The contents are
so affecting, that, tho' in full assembly, as I may say, in
this delightful family, I begged to be permitted to withdraw,
to write to them. Miss Grandison saw my confusion,
my puzzle, what shall I call it? To be charged
so home, my dear aunt! —Such apparent struggles— 
And were they, madam, so very apparent? —A young,
a new passion! —And so visibly increasing! —Pray, madam,
if it be so, it is not at its height—And is it not,
while but in its progress, conquerable? —But have I
been guilty of affectation? of reserves? —If I have,
my uncle has been very merciful to the aukward girl. 
And you think it impossible, madam, but he has seen
women whom he could love, before he saw me? Very
likely! But was it kind to turn the word gratitude
upon me in such a manner? 
I do see what an amiable openness of heart there is 

in Lady D. I admire her for it, and for her other
matronly qualities. What can you do, madam? 
What can I do? That is the question, called upon
as I am, by my grandmamma as well as by you, to
speak still plainer, plain as in your opinion I had spoken,
and indeed in my own, now I read the free sentence,
drawn out and separated from the rest of the
Letter. My grandmamma forgives, and even praises
me, for this sentence. She encourages me to speak
still plainer. It is no disgrace, she says, for a woman
of virtue to be in love with a worthy man. Love is
a natural passion, she tells me: Yet cautions me
against suffering it to triumph over my reason; in
short, not to love till there shall be a certainty of return. 
And so I can love as I will, when I will, nay
whom I will; for if he won't have me, I am desired
not to resolve against marrying some other; Lord D.
for example, if he will be so good as to have me. 
Well, but upon a full examination of my heart,
how do I find it, now I am called upon by my two
most venerable friends, to undraw the curtain, and to
put off the disguises, thro' which every child in love-matters
finds me out? Shall I speak my whole heart? 
—To such sympathizing friends surely I ought. Well,
then, I own to you, my honoured grandmamma and
aunt, that I cannot think of encouraging any other
address. Yet have I no hope. I look upon myself
as presumptuous: Upon him as too excellent, and
too considerable; for he has a great estate, and still
greater expectations: And as to personal and intellectual
merit, what woman can deserve him? —Even
in the article of fortune only, you think that, in prudence,
a man so munificent should look higher. 
Be pleased therefore, madam, in conformity to my
grandmamma's advice, to tell Lady D. from me,
‘That I think her laudable openness deserves like
openness: That your Harriet was disengaged in her
affections, absolutely disengaged, when you told her 

that she was: Tell her what afterwards happened:
Tell her how my gratitude engaged me: That, at
first, it was no more; but that now, being called
upon, on this occasion, I have owned my gratitude
exalted’ [It may not, I hope, be said, debased, the
object so worthy] ‘into—Love’—Yes, say Love—since
I act too aukwardly in the disguises I have assumed; 
‘That, therefore, I can no more in justice, than by
inclination, think of any other man: And own to
her, that her Ladyship has, however, engaged my
respectful Love, even to reverence, by her goodness
to me in the visit she honoured me with; and that,
for her sake, had I seen nothing objectable in Lord D.
upon an interview, and further acquaintance, I could
have given ear to this proposal, preferably to any
other that had yet been made me, were my heart
as free, as it was when she made her first proposal.’ 
And yet I own to you, my venerable friends, that I
always think of Mr. Orme with grateful pity, for his
humble, for his modest perseverance. What would
I give to see Mr. Orme married to some very worthy
woman, with whom he could be happy! 
Finally, bespeak for me her Ladyship's favour and
friendship; but not to be renewed till my Lord is
married—And may his nuptials be as happy as wished
to be by a mother so worthy! But tell her, at the same
time, that I would not, for twelve times my Lord's
12,000l. a year, give my hand to him, or to any
man, while another had a place in my heart; however
unlikely it is, that I may be called by the name
of the man I prefer. 
But tell Lady D. all this in confidence, in the strictest
confidence; among more general reasons regarding
the delicacy of our Sex, for fear the family I am
with, who now love, should hate, and, what would be
still worse, despise, your Harriet, for her presumption! 
—I think I could not bear that! —Don't mind this
great blot—Forgive it—It would fall—My pen found
it, before I saw it. 

* *
As to myself; whatever be my lot, I will endeavour
to reap consolation from these and other passages
in the two precious letters before me: 
“If you love, be not ashamed to own it to us— 
The man is Sir Charles Grandison.” 
“Love is a natural passion.” 
“Mine is laudable: The object of it is a man
not mean in understanding; nor profligate in morals; 
nor sordid in degree. All my friends are in
love with him as well as I.” 
“My love is a love of the purest kind.” 
“And I ought to acquiesce, because our love of
him is but as the love of private, compared to the
love of public.” 
Noble instructions! my dearest two mamma's! to
which I will endeavour to give their full weight. 
And now let me take it a little unkindly, that you
call me your orphan-girl! You two, and my honoured
uncle, have supplied all wanting relations to me: My
father then, my grandmamma, and my other mamma,
continue to pray for, and to bless, not your orphan,
but your real, daughter in all love and reverence, 
Harriet Byron-Shirley-Selby. 

