



My dear Father and Mother,
John being going your way, I am willing to
write, because he is so willing to carry any thing
for me. He says it does him good at his Heart to see
you both, and to hear you talk. He says you are
both so good, and so honest, that he always learns
something from you to the Purpose. It is a thousand
Pities, he says, that such honest Hearts should
not have better Luck in the World. But this is more
Pride to me, that I am come of such honest Parents,
than if I had been born a Lady. 
I hear nothing yet of going to Lady Davers. And
I am very easy at present here. For Mrs. Jervis
uses me as if I was her own Daughter, and is a very
good Woman, and makes my Master's Interest her
own. She is always giving me good Counsel, and I
love her, next to you two, I think, best of any body. 
She keeps so good Rule and Order, she is mightily 

respected by us all; and takes Delight to hear me
read to her; and all she loves to hear read, is good
Books, which we read whenever we are alone; so
that I think I am at home with you. She heard one
of our Men, Harry, who is no better than he should
be, speak freely to me; I think he call'd me his pretty
Pamela, and took hold of me, as if he would have
kiss'd me; for which you may be sure I was very
angry; and she took him to Task, and was as angry
at him as could be, and told me she was very well
pleas'd to see my Prudence and Modesty, and that
I kept all the Fellows at a Distance. And indeed I
am sure I am not proud, and carry it civil to every
body; but yet, methinks I can't bear to be look'd
upon by these Men-servants; for they seem as if they
would look one thro'; and, as I almost always breakfast,
dine, and sup with Mrs. Jervis, so good she is
to me, so I am very easy that I have so little to say
to them. Not but they are very civil to me in the
main, for Mrs. Jervis's sake, who they see loves
me; and they stand in Awe of her, knowing her to be
a Gentlewoman born, tho' she has had Misfortunes. 
I am going on again with a long Letter; for I love
Writing, and shall tire you. But when I began, I
only intended to say, that I am quite fearless of any
Danger now: And indeed can but wonder at myself,
(tho' your Caution to me was your watchful Love)
that I should be so foolish as to be so uneasy as I have
been: For I am sure my Master would not demean
himself so, as to think upon such a poor Girl as I,
for my Harm. For such a Thing would ruin his
Credit as well as mine, you know: For, to be sure,
he may expect one of the best Ladies in the Land. 
So no more at present; but that I am 
Your ever dutiful Daughter. 

