


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Thursday, Sept. 7.
I  Will write to your Letter as it lies before me. 
I do most heartily congratulate you, my dear Lady
G. on the arrival of your brother. I do not wonder
that his fatigues, and his disappointment, have
made an alteration in his person and countenance. Sir
Charles Grandison would not be the man he is, if he
had not sensibility. 
You could not know your brother, my dear, if you
expected from him recriminations on your past odd 

behaviour to Lord G. I hope he does not yet know
a tenth part of it: But if he did, as he hoped you saw
your error, and would be good for the future, he was
right surely to forget, what you ought not, but with
contrition, to remember. You are very naughty in
the Letter before me; and I love you too well to spare
you. 
What can you mean, my dear, by exulting so much
over your aunt, for living, to an advanced age, a single
woman? However ineffectual, let me add to my former
expostulatory chidings on this subject: Would
you have one think you are overjoyed, that you have
so soon put it out of any one's power to reproach you
on the like account? If so, you ought to be more
thankful than you seem to be, to Lord G. who has
extended his generosity to you, and kept you from
the odium. Upon my word, my dear Lady G. I think
it looks like a want of decency in women, to cast
reflexions on others of their Sex, possibly for their prudence
and virtue. Do you consider, how you exalt,
by your ludicrous freedoms, the men whom sometimes
you affect to despise? No wonder if they ridicule old
maids. It is their interest to do so. Lords of the
Creation, sometimes you deridingly call the insulters; 
Lords of the Creation, indeed you make them! —And
pray, do you think, that the same weakness which
made your aunt Grandison tell her dreams, in the joy
of her heart, as an old maid, might not have made her
guilty of the same foible, had she been an old wife? 
Joy is the parent of many a silly thing. Don't you
own, that the arrival of your brother, which made
your aunt break out into dream-telling, made you
break into laughter (even in a Letter) of which you
were ashamed to tell the cause? —Wives, my dear,
should not fall into the mistakes, for which they would
make maids the subject of their ridicule. You know
better; and therefore should be above the foolish multitude,
in a general cry to hunt down (as you reckon 

them) an unfortunate class of people, of your own
Sex. Your aunt Grandison's dreams, let me add,
were more innocent, than your waking mirth—You
must excuse me—I could say a great deal more upon
the subject; but if I have not said enough to make
you sorry for your fault, a great deal more would be
ineffectual—So much therefore for this subject. 
Poor dear Emily! —I wonder not at the effect the
arrival, and first sight, of her guardian, had upon her
tender heart. 
But how wickedly do you treat your Lord! —Fie
upon you, Charlotte! —And fie upon you again, for
writing what I cannot, for your credit-sake, read out
to my friends. I wish, my dear, I could bring you
to think, that there cannot be wit without justice; 
nor humour without decorum: My Lord has some few
foibles: But shall a wife be the first to discover them,
and expose him for them? Cannot you cure him of
them, without treating him with a ridicule which borders
upon contempt? —O my dear, you shew us
much greater foibles in yourself, than my Lord ever
yet had, when you make so bad an use of talents that
were given you for better purposes? One word only
more on this subject—You cannot make me smile,
my dear, when you are thus unseasonable in your mirth. 
Henceforth, then, remember, that your excursiveness
(allow me the word, I had a harsher in my head)
upon old maids, and your Lord, can only please yourself;
and I will not accept of your compliment. Why? 
Because I will not be a partaker in your fault; as I
should be, if I could countenance your levity. 
Levity, Harriet! 
Yes, levity, Charlotte—I will not spare you. Whom
do you spare? 
But do you really think me so ill as you represented
me to be, to your brother? I don't think I am. If I
did, I am sure I should endeavour to put my thoughts
in an absolutely new train: Nor would I quit the hold 

which at proper times, I do let go, to re-enter the
world, as an individual, who imagines herself of some
little use in it; and who is therefore obliged to perform,
with chearfulness, her allotted offices, however
generally insignificant I may comparatively be. 
You say, you had no thoughts of exciting your
brother's attention, by your strong colouring, when
you described the effects of my indisposition to him. 
Attention! —Compassion you might as well have said— 
I hope not. And I am obliged to Mr. Beauchamp for
his inference, from my chearfulness, that nothing lay
upon my mind. Now, tho' that inference seemed to
imply, that he thought, if he had not made the observation,
something might have been supposed to lie
upon my mind, I am much better satisfied that he
made it, than if Sir Charles had. 
Upon the whole, I cannot but be pleased at two
things in your Letter: The one, that Sir Charles expressed
so great a concern for my health: The other,
that you have all promised, and that voluntarily, and
from a sense of the fitness of the measure, that everything
be left to its natural course—For my sake, and
for goodness-sake, pray let it be so. I think the opening,
as you call it, was much, very much, too warm. 
Bless me, my dear, how I trembled as I read that
part! —I am not, methinks, quite satisfied with it,
tho' I am with your intention. 
Consider, my dear, Half a heart—A preferred Lady! 
—For quality, fortune, and every merit, so greatly
preferable—O my Charlotte! I cannot, were the best
to happen that can now happen, take such exceeding
joy, as I once could have done, in the prospect of that
best. —I have pride—But let us hear what the next Letters
from Italy say; and it will be then time enough
(if the truly admirable Lady shall adhere to her resolution)
to come with my scruples and drawbacks. Your
aunt Grandison is of opinion, that she will not adhere. 
Who can tell what to say? Imagination, unnaturally 

heightened, may change into one altitude from another. 
I myself sincerely think (and have so often said
it, that an uncharitable mind would perhaps charge me
with affectation for it) that Lady Clementina, and no
other woman, can deserve Sir Charles Grandison. 
Adieu, my dear. Pray tell your brother that I never
thought myself so ill as your friendly love made
you apprehend me to be: And that I congratulate
you, with all my heart, and him also (it would be an
affectation to forbear it, which would imply too much)
on his safe arrival in England. But be sure remember,
that I look upon you and your Lord, upon my
Lord and Lady L. and upon my sweet Emily, if she
sees what I write, as guardians of the honour (of
the punctilio, if you please, since no dis-honour can
be apprehended from Sir Charles Grandison) of 
Your and Their
Harriet Byron. 

