


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Thursday, April 13. 
I send you inclosed a Letter I received this morning
from Lady G.: I will suppose you have read it. 
Emily says, that the meeting between Sir Charles
and the Lady mentioned in it, was very polite on both
sides: But more cold on his, than on hers. She made
some difficulty, however, of dining at his house; and
her aunt, Lady Maffei, more. But on Sir Charles's
telling them, that he would bring his elder sister to
attend them thither, they complied. 
When I went to St. James's Square, Sir Charles and
Lady L. were gone in his coach to bring the two Ladies. 
Lady G. met me on the stairs-head, leading into
her dressing-room. Not a word, said she, of the
man's sullens: He repents: A fine figure, as I told
him, of a bridegroom, would he make in the eyes
of foreign Ladies, at dinner, were he to retain his
gloomy airs. He has begged my pardon; as good as
promised amendment; and I have forgiven him. 
Poor Lord G.! said I. 
Hush, hush! He is within: He will hear you:
And then perhaps repent of his repentance. 
She led me in: My Lord had a glow in his cheeks,
and looked as if he had been nettled; and was but
just recovering a smile, to help to carry off the petulance. 
O how saucily did her eyes look! Well, my
Lord, said she, I hope—But you say, I misunderstood— 
No more, madam, no more, I beseech you— 
Well, Sir, not a word more, since you are— 
Pray, madam— 

Well, well, give me your hand—You must leave
Harriet and me together. 
She humorously courtesied to him as he bowed to
me, taking the compliment as to herself. She nodded
her head to him, as he turned back his when he was
at the door; and when he was gone, If I can but
make this man orderly, said she, I shall not quarrel
with my brother for hurrying me, as he has done. 
You are wrong, excessively wrong, Charlotte: You
call my Lord a silly man, but can have no proof that
he is so, but by his bearing this treatment from you. 
None of your grave airs, my dear. The man is a
good sort of man, and will be so, if you and Lady L.
don't spoil him. I have a vast deal of roguery, but
no ill-nature, in my heart. There is luxury in jesting
with a solemn man, who wants to assume airs of privilege,
and thinks he has a right to be impertinent. 
I'll tell you how I will manage—I believe I shall often
try his patience, and when I am conscious that I have
gone too far, I will be patient if he is angry with
me; so we shall be quits. Then I'll begin again:
He will resent: And if I find his aspect very solemn— 
Come, come, no glouting, friend, I will say, and
perhaps smile in his face: I'll play you a tune, or sing
you a song—Which, which! Speak in a moment,
or the humour will be off. 
If he was ready to cry before, he will laugh then,
tho' against his will: And as he admires my finger,
and my voice, shall we not be instantly friends? 
It signified nothing to rave at her: She will have her
way. Poor Lord G.! —At my first knowlege of her,
I thought her very lively; but imagined not that she
was indiscreetly so. 
Lord G.'s fondness for his saucy bride was, as I
have reason to believe, his fault: I dared not to ask
for particulars of their quarrel: And if I had, and
found it so, could not, with such a raillying creature,
have entered into his defence, or censured her. 

I went down a few moments before her. Lord G.
whispered me, that he should be the happiest man in
the world, if I, who had such an influence over her,
would stand his friend. 
I hope, my Lord, said I, that you will not want
any influence but your own. She has a thousand
good qualities. She has charming spirits. You will
have nothing to bear with but from them. They will
not last always. Think only, that she can mean nothing
by the exertion of them, but innocent gaiety; 
and she will every day love your Lordship the better
for bearing with her. You know she is generous and
noble. 
I see, madam, said he, she has let you into— 
She has not acquainted me with the particulars of
the little misunderstanding; only has said, that there
had been a slight one; which was quite made up. 
I am ashamed, reply'd he, to have it thought by
Miss Byron, that there could have been a misunder-standing
between us, especially so early. She knows
her power over me. I am afraid, she despises me. 
Impossible, my Lord: Have you not observed, that
she spares nobody when she is in a lively humour? 
True—But here she comes! —Not a word, madam! 
—I bowed assenting silence. Lord G. said,
she, approaching him, in a low voice, I shall be jealous
of your conversations with Miss Byron. 
Would to heaven, my dearest life, snatching at her
withdrawn hand, that— 
I were half as good as Miss Byron: I understand
you: But time and patience, Sir; nodding to him,
and passing him. 
Admirable creature! said he, how I adore her! 
I hinted to her afterwards, his fear of her despising
him. Harriet, answered she, with a serious air, I
will do my duty by him. I will abhor my own heart,
if I ever find in it the shadow of a regard for any 

man in the world, inconsistent with that which he has
a right to expect from me. 
I was pleased with her. And found an opportunity
to communicate what she said, in confidence, to my
Lord; and had his blessings for it. 
But now for some account of Lady Olivia. With
which I will begin a new Letter. 

