



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, April 28. 
Mr. Lovelace is returned already. My brother's
projects were his pretence. I could not but
look upon this short absence as an evasion of his promise; 
especially as he had taken such precautions with
the people below; and as he knew that I proposed to
keep close within doors. I cannot bear to be dealt
meanly with, and angrily insisted, that he should directly
set out for Berkshire, in order to engage his
cousin, as he had promised. 
O my dearest life, said he, why will you banish
me from your presence? —I cannot leave you for so
long a time, as you seem to expect I should. I have
been hovering about town, ever since I left you. 
Edgware was the furthest place I went to; and there
I was not able to stay two hours, for fear, at this crisis
any thing should happen. Who can account for the
workings of an apprehensive mind, when all that is
dear and valuable to it is at stake? —You may spare
yourself the trouble of writing to any of your friends
till the happy ceremony has passed, that shall intitle me
to give weight to your application. When they know
we are marry'd, your brother's plots will be at an
end; and your father and mother, and uncles, must
be reconciled to you. —Why then should you hesitate
a moment to confirm my happiness? —Why, once
more, would you banish me from you? Why will
you not give the man, who has brought you into
difficulties, and who so honourably wishes to extricate
you from them, the happiness of doing so? 

He was silent. My voice failed to second the inclination
I had to say something not wholly discouraging
to a point so ardently pressed. 
I'll tell you, my angel, resumed he, what I propose
to do, if you approve of it. I will instantly go
out to view some of the handsome new squares, or fine
streets round them, and make a report to you of any
suitable house I find to be let. I will take such a
one as you shall choose, furnish it, and set up an
equipage befitting our condition. You shall direct the
whole. And on some early day, either before or
after we fix (it must be at your own choice) be pleased
to make me the happiest of men. And then will every
thing be in a desirable train. You shall receive in
your own house (if it can be so soon furnish'd as I
wish) the congratulations of all my relations: Charlotte
shall visit you in the interim: And if it take up
time, you shall choose whom you'll honour with
your company, first, second, or third, in the summer
months; and on your return, you shall find all that
was wanting in your new habitation supply'd; and
pleasures in a constant round shall attend us. O my
angel, take me to you, instead of banishing me from
you, and make me yours for ever. 
You see, my dear, that here was no day pressed
for. I was not uneasy about that; and the sooner
I recovered myself, as there was not. But, however,
I gave him no reason to upbraid me for refusing his
offer of going in search of a house. 
He is accordingly gone out for this purpose. But
I find, that he intends to take up his lodging here tonight; 
and if to-night, no doubt, on other nights,
when he is in town. As the doors and windows of
my apartment have good fastenings; as he has not,
in all this time, given me cause for apprehension; as
he has the pretence of my brother's schemes to plead; 
the people below are very courteous and obligeing; 
Miss Horton especially, who seems to have 

taken a great liking to me, and to be of a gentler
temper and manners, than Miss Martin; and as we
are now in a tolerable way; I imagine, it would look
particular to them all, and bring me into a debate
with a man, who, let him be set upon what he will,
has always a great deal to say for himself, if I insisted
upon his promise: On all these accounts, I think
I will take no notice of his lodging here, if he don't. 
Let me know, my dear, your thoughts of every
thing. You may believe I gave him back his note
the moment I saw him. 
Friday evening. 
Mr. Lovelace has seen two or three houses; but
none to his mind. But he has heard of one which
looks promising, he says, and which he is to inquire
about in the morning. 
Saturday morning. 
He has made his inquiries, and actually seen the
house he was told of last night. The owner of it is
a young widow lady, who is inconsolable for the
death of her husband, Fretchville her name. It is
furnished quite in taste, every thing being new within
these six months. He believes, if I like not the
furniture, the use of it may be agreed for, with the
house, for a time certain: But if I like it, he will
endeavour to take the one, and purchase the other,
directly. 
The lady fees no-body; nor are the best apartments
above-stairs to be view'd till she is either absent, or
gone into the country, where she proposes to live retired; 
and which she talks of doing in a fortnight or
three weeks, at farthest. 
What Mr. Lovelace saw of the house (which were
the salon and two parlours) was perfectly elegant
and he was assured, all is of a piece. The offices are
also very convenient; coach-house and stables at
hand. 

He shall be very impatient, he says, till I see the
whole; nor will he, if he finds he can have it, look
farther till I have seen it, except any thing else offer
to my liking. The price he values not. 
He has just now received a letter from Lady Betty
Lawrance, by a particular hand; the contents principally
relating to an affair she has in Chancery. But
in the postscript she is pleased to say very respectful
things of me. They are all impatient, she says, for
the happy day being over; which, they flatter themselves,
will ensure his reformation. 
He hoped, he told me, that I would soon enable
him to answer their wishes, and his own. But, altho'
the opportunity was so inviting, he urged not for the
day. Which is the more extraordinary, as he was
so pressing for marriage before we came to town. 
He was very earnest with me to give him, and four
of his friends, my company on Monday evening, at a
little collation. Miss Martin and Miss Horton cannot,
he says, be there, being engaged in a party of
their own, with two daughters of Colonel Solcombe,
and two nieces of Sir Anthony Holmes, upon an annual
occasion. But Mrs. Sinclair will be present, and
she gave him hope also of the company of a young
maiden lady of very great fortune and merit (Miss
Partington), to whom Colonel Sinclair, it seems, in
his life-time, was guardian, and who therefore calls
Mrs. Sinclair mamma. 
I desired to be excused. He had laid me, I said,
under a most disagreeable necessity of appearing as a
married person; and I would see as few people as
possible who were to think me so. 
He would not urge it, he said, if I were much
averse: But they were his select friends, men of birth
and fortune; who long'd to see me. It was true,
that they, as well as his friend Doleman, believed we
were married: But they thought him under the restrictions
that he had mentioned to the people below. 

I might be assured, he tole me, that his politeness before
them should be carried into the highest degree of
reverence. 
When he is set upon any thing, there is no knowing,
as I have said heretofore, what one can do. But
I will not, if I can help it, be made a shew of; especially
to men of whose characters and principles I
have no good opinion. I am, my dearest friend, 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
Mr. Lovelace, in his next letter to his friend Mr.
Belford, recites the most material passages in hers
preceding. He invites him to his collation on
Monday evening. 
Mowbray, Belton, and Tourville, says he, long
to see my angel, and will be there. She has refused
me; but must be present notwithstanding. And then
will I shew thee the pride and glory of the Harlowe
family, my implacable enemies; and thou shalt join
with me in my triumph over them all. 
If I can procure you this honour, you'll be ready
to laugh out, as I have often much ado to forbear, at
the puritanical behaviour of the mother before this
lady. Not an oath, not a curse, nor the least free
word, escapes her lips. She minces in her gaite. She
prims up her horse-mouth. Her voice, which when
she pleases, is the voice of thunder, is sunk into an
humble whine. Her stiff hams, that have not been
bent to a civility for ten years past, are now limber'd
into courtesies three-deep at every word. Her fat
arms are cross'd before her; and she can hardly be
prevailed upon to sit, in the presence of my goddess. 
I am drawing up instructions for ye all to observe
on Monday night. It will be thy care, who art a parading
fellow, and pretendest to wisdom, to keep the
rest from blundering. 

Saturday night. 
Most confoundedly alarm'd. —Lord, Sir, what do
you think? cry'd Dorcas—My lady is resolv'd to go
to church to-morrow! I was at quadrille with the
women below. —To church! said I, and down I laid
my cards. To church! repeated they, each looking
upon the other. We had done playing for that
night. Who could have dreamt of such a whim as
this? —Without notice, without questions! Her
cloaths not come! No leave asked! —Impossible she
should think to be my wife! —Why, this lady don't
consider, if she go to church, I must go too! —Yet
not to ask for my company! —Her brother and Singleton
ready to snap her up, as far as he knows! — 
Known by her cloaths! Her person, her features, so
distinguished! —Not such another woman in England! 
To church of all places! —Is the devil in the girl, said
I? as soon as I could speak. 
Well, but to leave this subject till to-morrow
morning, I will now give you the instructions I have
drawn up for yours and your companions behaviour
on Monday night. 
Instructions to be observed by John Belford, Richard
Mowbray, Thomas Belton, and James
Tourville, Esquires of the body to General Robert
Lovelace, on their admission to the presence
of his goddess. 
Then follow his humorous instructions: —In which
he cautions them to avoid all obscene hints, and
even the double entendre. 
You know, says he, that I never permitted any of
you to talk obscenely. Time enough for that, when
ye grow old, and can only talk. What! as I have
often said, cannot you touch a woman's heart, without
wounding her ear? 
I need not bid you respect me mightily. Your allegiance 

obliges you to that. And who, that sees me, respects
me not? 
He gives them their cue as to Miss Partington, and
her history and assumed character. 
So noted, says he, for innocent looks, yet deep
discretion! —And be sure to remember, that my beloved
has no name but mine; and that the mother
has no other than her maiden name, Sinclair; her
husband a lieutenant-colonel. 
Many other whimsical particulars he gives; and
then says, 
This dear lady is prodigiously learned in Theories: 
But as to Practics, as to Experimentals, must be, as
you know, from her tender years, a mere novice. 
Till she knew me, I dare say, she did not believe,
whatever she had read, that there were such fellows
in the world, as she'll see in you four. I shall have
much pleasure in observing how she'll stare at her company,
when she finds me the politest man of the five. 
And so much for instructions general and particular
for your behaviour on Monday night. 
And now, methinks, thou art curious to know,
what can be my view, in risking the displeasure of my
fair one, and alarming her fears, after four or five halcyon
days have gone over our heads? —I'll satisfy thee. 
The visitors of the two nieces will croud the house. 
Beds will be scarce. Miss Partington, a sweet modest
genteel girl, will be prodigiously taken with my
charmer; will want to begin a friendship with her. 
A share in her bed for one night only, will be requested. 
Who knows, but on that very Monday
night I may be so unhappy, as to give mortal offence
to my beloved? The shyest birds may be
caught napping. Should she attempt to fly me upon
it, cannot I detain her? Should she actually fly, cannot
I bring her back by authority, civil or uncivil, if
I have evidence upon evidence, that she acknowleged, 

tho' but tacitly, her marriage? —And should I, or
should I not succeed, and she forgive me, or if she but
descend to expostulate, or if she bear me in her sight; 
then will she be all my own. All delicacy is my
charmer. I long to see how such a delicacy, on either
occasion, will behave. And in my situation it behoves
me to provide against every accident. 
I must take care, knowing what an eel I have to
do with, that the little wriggling rogue does not slip
thro' my fingers. How silly should I look, staring
after her, when she had shot from me into the muddy
river, her family, from which, with so much difficulty,
I have taken her! 
Well then; here are—Let me see—How many
persons are there who, after Monday night, will be
able to swear, that she has gone by my name, answered
to my name, had no other view in leaving her
friends, but to go by my name? Her own relations
not able nor willing to deny it. —First, here are my
servants; her servant Dorcas, Mrs. Sinclair, her two
nieces, and Miss Partington. 
But for fear these evidences should be suspected,
here comes the jét of the business. —No less than four
worthy gentlemen, of fortune and family, who were
all in company such a night particularly, at a collation
to which they were invited by Robert Lovelace of
Sandoun-Hall, in the county of Lancaster, Esquire,
in company with Magdalen Sinclair widow, and
Priscilla Partington spinster, and the Lady complainant; 
when the said Robert Lovelace addressed himself
to the said lady, on a multitude of occasions, as
his lady; as they and others did, as Mrs. Lovelace; 
every one complimenting and congratulating her upon
her nuptials; and that she received such their compliments
and congratulations with no other visible displeasure
or repugnance, than such as a young bride,
full of blushes and pretty confusion, might be supposed
to express upon such contemplative revolvings as 

those compliments would naturally inspire. Nor do
thou rave at me, Jack, nor rebel. —Dost think I
brought the dear creature here for nothing? 
And there's a faint sketch of my plot. —Stand by,
varlets—Tanta-ra-ra-ra! —Veil your bonnets, and
confess your master! 