



My dearest Lady,
I now set myself to obey your Ladyship's second
Command, which is, To give an Account in what
manner your dear Brother broke to me the Affair
of the unfortunate Miss Godfrey, with my Behaviour
upon it: And this I cannot do better, than by
transcribing the Relation I gave at the Time, in those
Letters to my dear Parents which your Ladyship has
not seen, in these very Words. 
[See Vol. II. p. 359. beginning My dear Mr. B.
down to p. 374. Line 20.] 
Thus far, my dear Lady, the Relation I gave to
my Parents, at the Time of my being first acquainted
with this melancholy Affair. 

It is a great Pleasure to me, that I can already flatter
myself, from the Hints you kindly give me, that
I behaved as you wished I should behave. Indeed,
Madam, I could not help it; for I pitied most sincerely
the unhappy Lady; and tho' I could not but
rejoice, that I had had the Grace to escape the dangerous
Attempts of the dear Intriguer, yet never did
the Story of any unfortunate Lady make such an Impression
upon me as hers did: She loved him, and
believed, no doubt, he loved her too well to take
ungenerous Advantages of her soft Passion for him; 
and so, by Degrees, put herself in his Power, and too
seldom, alas! have the noblest-minded of the seducing
Sex the Mercy or the Goodness to spare the poor
Creatures that do! –––And then this Love, to be sure,
is a sad Thing, when once it is suffer'd to reign! 
–––A perfect Tyrant!–––requiring an unconditional Obedience
to its arbitrary Dictates, and deeming every
Instance of Discretion, and Prudence, and Virtue itself,
too often, but as so many Acts of Rebellion to
its usurped Authority. 
And then, how do even Blemishes become Perfections
in those we love? Crimes themselves too
often, to inconsiderate Minds, appear but as human
Failings; and human Failings are a common Cause,
and always pardonable by human Frailty. 
Then 'tis another Misfortune of People in Love,
they always think highly of the beloved Object,
and lowly of themselves; such a dismal Mortifier is
Love! 
I say not this, Madam, to excuse the poor Lady's
Fall: Nothing can do that; because Virtue is, and
ought to be, preferable to all Considerations, and to
Life itself. But methinks I love this dear Lady so
well, for the sake of her edifying Penitence, that I
would fain extenuate her Crime, if I could; and the
rather, as, in all Probability, it was a first Love on both 

Sides; and so he could not appear to her as a practised
Deceiver. 
Your Ladyship will see by what I have transcribed,
how I behaved myself to the dear Miss Goodwin;
and I am so fond of the little Charmer, as well for
the sake of her unhappy Mother, tho' personally
unknown to me, as for the Relation she bears to
the dear Gentleman whom I am bound to love and
honour, that I must beg your Ladyship's Interest to
procure her to be given up to my Care, when it
shall be thought proper. I am sure I shall act by
her as tenderly, as if I was her own Mother. And
glad I am, that the poor unfaulty Baby is so justly
beloved by Mr. B. But I will here conclude this
Letter, with assuring your Ladyship, that I am, 
Your obliged and humble Servant,
P. B. 

