



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

May 24. 
The devil take this Uncle of mine! He has at
last sent me a Letter, which I cannot shew,
without exposing the head of our family for a fool. 
A confounded parcel of pop-guns has he let off upon
me. I was in hopes he had exhausted his whole
stock of this sort, in his Letter to you. —To keep
it back, to delay sending it, till he had recollected
all this farrago of nonsense—Confound his Wisdom of
nations, if so much of it is to be scraped together, in
disgrace of itself, to make one egregious simpleton! 
—But I am glad I am fortified with this piece of
flagrant folly, however; since, in all human affairs,
the convenient and inconvenient, the good and the bad,
are so mingled, that there is no having the one without
the other. 
I have already offered the Bill inclosed in it to my
Beloved; and read to her part of the Letter. But
she refused the Bill: And as I am in cash myself, I
shall return it. She seemed very desirous to peruse
the whole Letter. And when I told her, that were
it not for exposing the writer, I would oblige her,
she said, It would not be exposing his Lordship to
shew it to her; and that she always preferred the
Heart to the Head. I knew her meaning; but did
not thank her for it. 
All that makes for me in it, I will transcribe for
her—Yet hang it, she shall have the Letter, and my
Soul with it, for one consenting kiss. 
* *
She has got the Letter from me, without the Reward. 
Duce take me, if I had the courage to propose
the condition. A new character this of Bashfulness
in thy friend. I see, that a truly modest woman 

may take even a confident man keep his distance. 
By my soul, Belford, I believe, that Nine women
in Ten, who fall, fall either from their own Vanity,
or Levity, or for want of Circumspection, and proper
Reserves. 
* *
I did intend to take my reward on her returning
a Letter so favourable to us both. But she sent it to
me, sealed up, by Dorcas. I might have thought
that there were two or three hints in it, that she
would be too nice immediately to appear to. I send
it to thee; and here will stop, to give thee time to
read it. Return it as soon as thou hast perused it. 