



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Saturday, May 20. 
I am pleased with the sober reflection with which
thou concludest thy last; and I thank thee for it. 
Poor Belton! —I did not think his Thomasine
would have proved so very a devil. But this must
everlastingly be the risque of a keeper, who takes up
with a low-bred girl. This I never did. Nor had I
occasion to do it. Such a one as I, Jack, needed
only, till now, to shake the stateliest tree, and the
mellowed fruit dropt into my mouth: Always of
Montaigne's taste, thou knowest: —Thought it a
glory to subdue a girl of family. —More truly delightful
to me the seduction-progress than the crowning
act: For that's a vapour, a bubble! And most cordially
do I thank thee for thy indirect hint, that I am
right in my present pursuit. 
From such a woman as Miss Harlowe, a man is secured
from all the inconveniences thou expatiatest
upon. 

Once more, therefore, do I thank thee, Belford,
for thy approbation! —A man need not, as thou sayest,
sneak into holes and corners, and shun the day,
in the company of such a woman as this. How
friendly in thee, thus to abet the favourite purpose of
my heart! —Nor can it be a disgrace to me, to permit
such a Lady to be called by my name! —Nor shall
I be at all concerned about the world's censure, if I
live to the years of discretion, which thou mentionest,
should I be taken in, and prevailed upon to tread
with her the good old path of my ancestors. 
A blessing on thy heart, thou honest fellow! I
thought thou wert in jest, and but acquitting thyself
of an engagement to Lord M, when thou wert pleading
for Matrimony in behalf of this Lady! —It could
not be Principle, I knew, in thee: It could not be
Compassion—A little Envy indeed I suspected! —But
now I see thee once more thyself: And once more,
say I, A blessing on thy heart, thou true friend, and
very honest fellow! 
Now will I proceed with courage in all my schemes,
and oblige thee with the continued narrative of my
progressions towards bringing them to effect! —But
I could not forbear to interrupt my Story, to shew
my gratitude. 