



Dear Father and Mother,
Our John having no Opportunity to go your
Way, I write again, and send both Letters at
once. I can't say yet when I can get away, nor
how I shall come; because Mrs-Jervis shew'd my
Master the Waistcoat I am flowering for him, and
he said, It looks well enough, I think the Creature
had best stay till she has finish'd it. 
There is some private Talk carry'd on betwixt
him and Mrs. Jervis, that she don't tell me of; but
yet she is very kind to me, and I don't mistrust her
at all. I should be very base if I did. But to be
sure she must oblige him, and keep all his lawful
Commands; and other, I dare say, she won't keep; 
she is too good, and loves me too well; but she
must stay when I am gone, and so must get no Ill-will. 
She has been at me again to ask to stay, and
humble myself, as she says. But what have I done,
Mrs. Jervis, said I? If I have been a Sawce-box, and
a Bold-face, and Pert, and a Creature, as he calls
me, have I not had Reason? Do you think I should
ever have forgot myself, if he had not forgot to act
as my Master? Tell me, from your own Heart, dear
Mrs. Jervis, said I, if you think I could stay and be
safe? What would you think, or how would you
act in my Case? 
My dear Pamela, said she, and kiss'd me, I don't
know how I should act, or what I should think. I
hope I should act as you do. But I know nobody
else that would. My Master is a fine Gentleman; he
has a great deal of Wit and Sense, and is admir'd, as
I know, by half a dozen Ladies, who would think 

themselves happy in his Addresses. He has a noble
Estate; and yet I believe he loves my good Maiden,
tho' his Servant, better than all the Ladies in the
Land; and he has try'd to overcome it, because he
knows you are so much his Inferior; and 'tis my Opinion
he finds he can't; and that vexes his proud
Heart, and makes him resolve you shan't stay; and
so he speaks so cross to you, when he sees you by
Accident. 
Well, but, Mrs. Jervis, said I, let me ask you, if
he can stoop to like such a poor Girl as I, as may be
he may, for I have read of Things almost as strange,
from great Men to poor Damsels; What can it be
for? —He may condescend, may-hap, to think I may
be good enough for his Harlot; and those Things
don't disgrace Men, that ruin poor Women, as the
World goes. And so, if I was wicked enough, he
would keep me till I was undone, and 'till his Mind
changed; for even wicked Men, I have read, soon
grow weary of Wickedness of one Sort, and love
Variety. Well then, poor Pamela must be turn'd off,
and look'd upon as a vile abandon'd Creature, and
every body would despise her; ay, and justly too,
Mrs. Jervis; for she that can't keep her Virtue, ought
to live in Disgrace. 
But, Mrs. Jervis, said I, let me tell you, that I
hope, if I was sure he would always be kind to me,
and never turn me off at all, that God will give me
his Grace, so as to hate and withstand his Temptations,
were he not only my Master, but my King,
for the Sin's sake; and this my poor dear Parents
have always taught me; and I should be a sad wicked
Creature indeed, if, for the sake of Riches or Favour,
I should forfeit my good Name: yea, and worse
than any other young body of my Sex; because I
can so contentedly return to my Poverty again, and
think it less Disgrace to be oblig'd to wear Rags, and 

live upon Rye-bread and Water, as I use to do,
than to be a Harlot to the greatest Man in the World. 
Good Mrs. Jervis lifted up her Hands, and had her
Eyes full of Tears: God bless you, my dear Love,
said she; you are my Admiration and Delight! — 
How shall I do to part with you? 
Well, good Mrs. Jervis, said I, let me ask you
now: —You and he have some Talk, and you mayn't
be suffer'd to tell me all. But, do you think, if I was
to ask to stay, that he is sorry for what he has done!
ay, and asbam'd of it too! for I am sure he ought,
considering his high Degree, and my low Degree,
and how I have nothing in the World to trust to but
my Honesty! Do you think in your own Conscience
now, pray answer me truly; that he would never
offer any thing to me again; and that I could be
safe? 
Alas! my dear Child, said she, don't put thy home
Questions to me, with that pretty becoming Earnestness
in thy Look. I know this, that he is vex'd at
what he has done; he was vex'd the first Time, more
vex'd the second Time. 
Yes, said I, and so he will be vex'd I suppose the
third, and the fourth Time too, 'till he has quite
ruin'd your poor Maiden, and who will have Cause
to be vex'd then? 
Nay, Pamela, said she, don't imagine that I would
be accessary to your Ruin for the World. I only can
say, that he has yet done you no Hurt; and 'tis no
Wonder that he should love you, you are so pretty; 
tho' so much beneath him: But I dare swear for
him, he never will offer you any Force. 
You say, said I, that he was sorry for his first Offer
in the Summer-house; well, and how long did his
Sorrow last? —Only 'till he found me by myself; 
and then he was worse than before: and so became 

sorry again. And if he has deign'd to love me, and
you say can't help it, why he can't help it neither, if
he should have an Opportunity, a third time to
distress me. And I have read, that many a Man
has been asham'd at a Repulse, that never would, had
they succeeded. Besides, Mrs. Jervis, if he really
intends to offer no Force, What does that mean? — 
While you say he can't help liking me, for Love
it cannot be! —Does not it imply, that he hopes to
ruin me by my own Consent? I think, said I, (and
I hope God would give me Grace to do so) that I
should not give way to his Temptations on any Account; 
but it would be very presumptuous in me to
rely upon my own Strength, against a Gentleman of
his Qualifications and Estate, and who is my Master; 
and thinks himself intitled to call me Bold-face, and
what not; only for standing on my necessary Defence? 
And that where the Good of my Soul
and Body, and my Duty to God, and my Parents,
are all concerned. How then, Mrs. Jervis, said I
can I ask or wish to stay? 
Well, well, says she; as he seems very desirous
you should not stay, I hope it is from a good Motive; 
for fear he should be tempted to disgrace himself as
well as you. No, no, Mrs. Jervis, said I; I have
thought of that too, for I would be glad to think of
him with that Duty that becomes me; but then he
would have let me gone to Lady Davers, and not
have hinder'd my Preferment. And he would not
have said, I should return to my Poverty and
Distress, when I had been, by his Mother's Goodness,
lifted out of it; but that he intended to fright me,
and punish me, as he thought, for not complying with
his Wickedness: And this shews me enough what
I have to expect from his future Goodness, except
I will deserve it at his own dear, dear Price! 

She was silent, and I said, Well there's no more to
be said; I must go, that's certain; All my Concern
will be how to part with you: And indeed, next to
you; with every body; for all my Fellow-servants
have lov'd me, and you and they will cost me a Sigh
and a Tear too now-and-then, I am sure; and so I
fell a-crying. I could not help it. For it is a pleasant
Thing to one to be in a House among a great
many Fellow-servants, and be belov'd by them all. 
Nay, I should have told you before now, how
kind and civil Mr. Longman our Steward is:
Vastly courteous indeed on all Occasions, and he said,
once to Mrs. Jervis, be wish'd he was a young Man
for my sake, I should be his Wife, and he would
settle all he had upon me on Marriage; and, you
must know, he is reckon'd worth a Power of
Money. 
I take no Pride in this; but bless God, and your
good Example, my dear Parents, that I have been
enabled to have every body's good Word. Not but
that our Cook one Day, who is a little snappish and
cross sometimes, said once to me, Why this Pamela
of ours goes as fine as a Lady. See what it is to have
a fine Face! —I wonder what the Girl will come
to at last! 
She was hot with her Work; and I sneak'd away; 
for I seldom went down in the Kitchen; and I heard
the Butler say, Why, Jane, nobody has your good
Word! What has Mrs. Pamela done to you? I am
sure she offends no body. And what, said the peevish
Wench, have I said to her, Foolatum; but that she was
pretty? They quarrel'd afterwards, I heard; but I
was sorry for it, and troubled myself no more about
it. Forgive this silly Prattle, from 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

O! I forgot to say, that I would stay to finish the
Waistcoat; I never did a prettier Piece of
Work; and I am up early and late to get it
finish'd; for I long to come to you. 

