



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Morning, Nine o'clock. 
I am just returned from my morning walk, and
already have received a Letter from Mr. Lovelace
in answer to mine deposited last night. He must have
had pen, ink, and paper, with him; for it was written
in the coppice; with this circumstance: On one
knee, kneeling with the other. Not from reverence
to the written to, however, as you'll find! 
Well are we instructed early to keep these men at
distance. An undesigning open heart, where it is
loth to disoblige, is easily drawn in, I see, to oblige
more than ever it designed. It is too apt to govern
itself by what a bold spirit is encouraged to expect of
it. It is very difficult for a good-natured young person
to give a negative where it disesteems not. 
Our hearts may harden and contract, as we gain
experience, and when we have smarted perhaps for
our easy folly: And so they ought, or we should be
upon very unequal terms with the world. 
Excuse these grave reflections. This man has vexed 

me heartily. I see his gentleness was Art: Fierceness,
and a temper like what I have been too much used to
at home, are Nature in him. Nothing, I think, shall
ever make me forgive him; for surely, there can be
no good reason for his impatience on an expectation
given with reserve, and revocable. —I so much to suffer
thro' him; yet, to be treated as if I were obliged to
bear insults from him!— 
But here you will be pleased to read his Letter; 
which I shall inclose. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Good God!
What is now to become of me! —How shall I
support this disappointment! —No new cause! 
—On one knee, kneeling with the other, I write! — 
My feet benumbed with midnight wanderings thro'
the heaviest dews, that ever fell: My wig and my
linen dripping with the hoar-frost dissolving on them! 
—Day but just breaking—Sun not risen to exhale— 
May it never rise again! —Unless it bring healing and
comfort to a benighted soul! In proportion to the joy
you had inspired (ever lovely promiser!) in such proportion
is my anguish! 
&dotup;O my beloved creature! —But are not your very
excuses confessions of excuses inexcusable? I know
not what I write! —That servant in your way (a) ! 
By the great God of heaven, that servant was not,
dared not, could not be in your way! —Curse upon
the cool caution that is pleaded to deprive me of an
expectation so transporting!&dotup; 
And are things drawing towards a crisis between
your friends and you? —Is not this a reason for me to
expect, the rather to expect, the promised Interview? 
Can I write all that is in my mind, say you? — 
Impossible!—Not the hundredth part of what is in
my mind, and in my apprehension, can I write! 

O the wavering, the changeable Sex! —But can
Miss Clarissa Harlowe— 
Forgive me, Madam! —I know not what I write! 
Yet, I must, I do, insist upon your promise—Or
that you will condescend to find better excuses for the
failure—Or convince me, that stronger reasons are
imposed upon you, than those you offer. —A promise
once given (upon deliberation given) the promised only
can dispense with;—except in cases of a very apparent
necessity imposed upon the promiser, which leaves no
power to perform it. 
The first promise you ever made me! Life and
Death perhaps depending upon it—My heart desponding
from the barbarous methods resolved to be taken
with you in malice to me! 
You would sooner chuse death than Solmes (How my
Soul spurns the competition!) O my beloved creature,
what are these but words? —Whose words? —Sweet
and ever-adorable—What? —Promise-breaker—must
I call you? —How shall I believe the asseveration
(your supposed duty in the question! Persecution so
flaming! Hatred to me so strongly avowed!) after
this instance of your so lightly dispensing with your
promise? 
If, my dearest Life! you would prevent my distraction,
or, at least, distracted consequences, renew
the promised hope! —My fate is indeed upon its crisis. 
Forgive me, dearest creature, forgive me! —I know
I have written in too much anguish of mind! —Writing
this, in the same moment that the just-dawning
light has imparted to me the heavy disappointment. 
I dare not re-peruse what I have written. —I must
deposit it. —It may serve to shew you my distracted apprehension
that This disappointment is but a prelude
to the greatest of All. —Nor, having here any other
paper, am I able to write again if I would on this
gloomy spot (Gloomy is my Soul; and all Nature 

round me partakes of my gloom!) —I trust it therefore
to your goodness—If its fervor excite your displeasure
rather than your pity, you wrong my passion; and I
shall be ready to apprehend, that I am intended to be
the sacrifice of more miscreants than one! [Have patience
with me, dearest creature! —I mean Solmes and
your Brother only]. But if, exerting your usual generosity,
you will excuse and re-appoint, may That
God, whom you profess to serve, and who is the God
of Truth and of Promises, protect and bless you, for
both; and for restoring to Himself, and to Hope, 
Your ever-adoring
yet almost desponding
Lovelace! 
Ivy-Cavern, in the
Coppice—Day but
just breaking. 
This is the Answer I shall return. 

Wednesday Morning. 
I am amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproaches. 
Pressed and teazed, against convenience
and inclination, to give you a private meeting, am I
to be thus challenged and upbraided, and my Sex reflected
upon, because I thought it prudent to change
my mind? —A liberty I had reserved to myself, when
I made the appointment, as you call it. I wanted not
instances of your impatient spirit to other people: Yet
may it be happy for me, that I have this new one; 
which shews, that you can as little spare me, when I
pursue the dictates of my own reason, as you do others,
for acting up to theirs. Two motives you must be
governed by in this excess. The one my easiness; the
other your own presumption. Since you think you
have found out the first, and have shewn so much of
the last upon it, I am too much alarmed, not to wish
and desire, that your Letter of this day may conclude
all the trouble you had from, or for, 
Your humble Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 
I believe, my dear, I may promise myself your approbation, 

whenever I write or speak with spirit, be
it to whom it will. Indeed, I find but too much reason
to exert it, since I have to deal with people, who
govern themselves in their conduct to me, not by
what is fit or decent, right or wrong, but by what
they think my temper will bear. I have, till very
lately, been praised for mine; but it has always been
by those who never gave me opportunity to return
the compliment to them. Some people have acted,
as if they thought forbearance on one side absolutely
necessary for them and me to be upon good terms together; 
and in this case have ever taken care rather
to owe that obligation than to lay it. You have hinted
to me, that resentment is not natural to my temper,
and that therefore it must soon subside: It may be so
with respect to my relations; but not to Mr. Lovelace,
I assure you. 
Wednesday Noon, March 29. 
We cannot always answer for what we can do: 
But to convince you, that I can keep my above resolution,
with regard to Mr. Lovelace, angry as my
Letter is, and three hours as it is since it was written,
I assure you, that I repent it not; nor will soften it,
altho' I find it is not taken away. And yet I hardly
ever before did any-thing in anger, that I did not repent
in half an hour; and question myself in less than
that time, whether I were right or wrong. 
In this respite till Tuesday, I have a little time to
look about me, as I may say, and to consider of what
I have to do, and can do. And Mr. Lovelace's insolence
will make me go very home with myself. Not
that I think I can conquer my aversion to Mr. Solmes. 
I am sure I cannot. But, if I absolutely break with
Mr. Lovelace, and give my friends convincing proofs
of it, who knows but they will restore me to their
favour, and let their views in relation to the other
man go off by degrees? —Or, at least, that I may be 

safe till my Cousin Morden arrives: To whom, I
think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace
has assured me, that my friends have written to him
to make good their side of the question. 
But, with all my courage, I am exceedingly apprehensive
about the Tuesday next, and about what
may result from my stedfastness; for stedfast I am sure
I shall be. They are resolved, I am told, to try
every means to induce me to comply with what they
are determined upon. And I am resolved to do all I
can to avoid what they would force me to do. A
dreadful contention between Parents and Child! — 
Each hoping to leave the other without excuse, whatever
the consequence may be. 
What can I do? Advise me, my dear. Something
is strangely wrong somewhere! to make Parents, the
most indulgent till now, seem cruel in a child's eye; 
and a Daughter, till within these few weeks, thought
unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment,
a rebel! —O my ambitious and violent Brother! What
may he have to answer for to both! 
Be pleased to remember, my dear, that your last
favour was dated on Saturday. This is Wednesday: 
And none of mine have been taken away since. Don't
let me want your advice. My situation is extremely
difficult. —But I am sure you love me still: And not
the less on that account. Adieu, my beloved friend. 
Cl. Harlowe. 