


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Sat. March 31. 
Now, my dear grandmamma, let me give you
some account of what passed yesterday. 
The articles signed and witnessed, were put into
Lady Clementina's hand, and a pen given her, that
she might write her name, in the presence of all her
surrounding friends here. 
Never woman appeared with more dignity in her
air and manner. She was charmingly dressed, and
became her dress. A truly lovely woman! But every
one by looks seemed concerned at her solemnity. 
She signed her name; but tore off, deliberately their
names; and, kissing the torn bit, put it in her bosom:
Then, throwing herself on her knees to her
father and mother, who stood together, and presenting
the paper to the former; Never let it be said,
that your child, your Clementina, has presumed to
article in form with the dearest of parents. My name
stands. It will be a witness against me, if I break
the articles which I have signed. But in your forgiveness,
my Lord, in yours, madam, and in a thousand
acts of indulgence, I have too much experienced
your past, to doubt your future, goodness to me. 
Your intention, my ever honoured parents, is your
act. I pray to God to enable your Clementina to be
all you wish her to be. In the single Life only indulge
me. Your word is all the assurance I wish for. 
I will have no other. 
They embraced her. They tenderly raised her between
them; and again embraced her. 
I would not, methinks, Sir, said she, turning to
Sir Charles, for the first time see the Count of Belvedere
before all this company, tho' I revere every
one in it. Is the Count in the house? 

He is in my Study, madam. 
Will my mamma, said she, turning to her, honour
me with her presence? 
She gave her hand to Sir Charles, and took mine. — 
Jeronymo followed her; and Sir Charles led her into the
next room. Too great solemnity in all this! whispered
the Marquis to Father Marescotti. She courtesied,
invitingly, to Mrs. Beaumont. She also followed her. 
Sir Charles, seating her and the Marchioness, by
the young Lady's silent permission, went into his
Study; and, having prepared the Count to expect a
solemn and uncommon reception, introduced him. 
He approached her, profoundly bowing: A sweet
blush overspread her cheeks: You, my Lord of Belvedere,
said she, are one of those my friends, to
whom I am, in some measure, accountable for the
rash step which brought me into this kingdom; because
it has induced you to accompany my brothers,
whom you have always honoured with your friendship. 
—Forgive me for any inconveniencies you have
suffered on this occasion. 
What honour does Lady Clementina do me to rank
me in the number of the friends to whom she thinks
herself accountable! —Believe me, madam— 
My Lord, interrupted she, I shall always regard
you as the friend of my family, and as my friend. I
shall wish your happiness, I do wish your happiness, as
my own; and I cannot give you a better proof that I
do, than by with-holding from you the hand which
you have sought to obtain with an unshaken, and,
my friends think, an obliging perseverance, quite thro'
an unhappy malady, which ought to have deterred
you, for many sakes, and most for your own. 
My dear mamma, throwing herself at her feet,
forgive me for my perseverance. It is not altogether
owing (I hope it is not at all owing) to perverseness,
and to a wilful resistance of the wills and wishes of all
my friends, that I have withstood you. Two reasons 

influenced me, when I declined another hand: Religion
and Country, a double reason, was one; the unhappy
malady which had seized me, was another. Two
reasons, rising with dignity, and turning from her
weeping mother, also influence me with regard to the
Count of Belvedere; tho' neither of them are the
important articles of Religion and Country. I own to
you, before these my dearest friends, and let it be
told to every one concerned to know it, that justice
to the Count of Belvedere is one—What a wretch
should I be, if I gave my hand to a man who had
not the preference in my heart, which is a husband's
due! —And should I, who had an unhappy reason to
refuse one worthy man for his own sake, perhaps for
the sakes of the unborn (I will speak out on this important
occasion) not be determined to do as much
justice to another? —In one word, I refused to punish
the Chevalier Grandison [Madam, to me, you know
my story]: What has the Count of Belvedere done,
that I should make no scruple to punish him? My
good Lord, be satisfied with my wishes for your happiness. 
I find myself, at times, very, very wrong. I have
given proofs but too convincing to all my friends, that
I am not right. —While I so think, conscience, honour,
justice (as I told you once before, my good Chevalier)
compel me to embrace the Single Life. —I
have, in duty to my nearest friends, given up the
way I should have chosen to lead it in. —Let me try
to recover myself in their way. My dearest, dearest,
mamma (again dropping on her knees to her) I will
endeavour to make all my friends happy in the way
they have agreed to make me so. Pray for me, all
my friends!—looking round her, tears in big drops
trickling down her cheeks. Then rising, Pray for
me, my Lord of Belvedere: I will for you; and that
you may do justice to the merit of some worthier
woman, who can do justice to yours. 
She hurried from us, in a way which shewed she 

was too much elevated for her corporal powers. Sir
Charles besought Mrs. Beaumont to follow her. 
Mrs. Beaumont took my hand. 
We found the Lady in the Study: She was on her
knees, and in tears. She arose at our entrance. Each
of us hastening to give her a hand, O my dear Lady
Grandison, said she, forgive me. —My dear Mrs. Beaumont,
am I, am I wrong? Tell me, Have I behaved
amiss? 
We both applauded her. Well we might. If her
greatness be owing to a raised imagination, who shall
call it a malady? Who, but for the dear Lady's
own sake, would regret the next-to-divine impulse,
by which, on several occasions, she has shewn herself
actuated? 
She suffered herself to be led to her mother, who
embracing her (Clementina again kneeling to her)
My dearest child, my blessed daughter, we all of us,
while such are your apprehensions, must acquiesce
with your reasons. Be happy, my Love, in your
own magnanimity. I glory in my child. 
And I in my Sister, said the noble Jeronymo— 
Saint! Angel! kneeling to her on one knee, notwithstanding
his lameness, I next to adore my Sister. 
She called him her brother, her true brother. Then,
taking my hand; And will you, Lady Grandison, said
she, be my Sister? Shall Sir Charles Grandison be my
Brother? Will you return with us into Italy? Shall
we cultivate on both sides a family-friendship to the
end of our lives? 
I threw my arms about her neck, tears mingling
on the cheeks of both: It will be my ambition, my
great ambition, to deserve the distinction you give
me—My Sister, my Friend, the Sister of my best
Friend, love him as he honours you; and me for his
sake, as I will you for your own, as well as his, to
the end of my life. 
Sir Charles clasped his arms about us both. His 

eyes spoke his admiration of her, and his delight in
each. Angels he called us. Then seating us, he
took the Count's hand; and, leading him to her, Let
me, madam, present to you the Count of Belvedere, as
a man equally to be pitied and esteemed. He yields to
your magnanimity with a greatness of mind like your
own. Receive then, acknowlege, the friend in him. 
He will endeavour to forego a dearer hope. 
Then will I receive him as my friend. I thank
you, my Lord, for the honour you have so long done
me. May you be happy with a woman, who can deserve
you! —See that happy pair before you! May you
be as happy as Sir Charles Grandison! —What greater
felicity can I wish you? 
He took her hand: On one knee he lifted it to
his lips: I will tear from you, madam, a tormentor. 
I must ask nothing of you; but, for myself, I can
only promise, in the words of the Chevalier Grandison,
to endeavour to forego, a dearer, the dearest,
hope. 
The Count arose, bowing to her with profound
respect; his eyes full; as his heart seemed to be. Signor
Jeronymo motioned to return to the company. 
Lady Clementina wished to retire with me, till what
had passed was related to the rest. I led her to my
closet. There did we renew our vows of everlasting
friendship. 
Sir Charles, thinking the relation would be painful
to the Count, withdrew with him into his Study. 
Mrs. Beaumont, and Signor Jeronymo, told those
who were not present at the affecting scenes, what
had passed. 
When we were summoned to dinner, every one received
Lady Clementina as an Angel. They applauded
her for her noble behaviour to the Count, and
blessed themselves for having taken the resolution of
coming to England; and, most of all, they blessed my
dear Sir Charles; to whom they ascribed all their opening 

happy prospects; and promised themselves that his
family and theirs would be as much one, as if the alliance,
once so near taking place, had actually done so. 
Sir Charles, at and after dinner, urged the carrying
into execution the latter part of his beneficent
plan. He offered to attend them to the Drawingroom,
to the Play, to the Oratorios (and took that opportunity
to give the praises which every-body allows
to be due to Mr. Handel); and to every place of Public
Entertainment which was worthy the notice of Foreigners; 
and left it to their choice, whether they
would go first to Grandison-hall, or satisfy their curiosity
in and about town. 
The Marquis said, that as Sir Charles and I were
brought out of the country by the arrival of their
Clementina, and our expectation of them, he doubted
not but it would be most agreeable to us, to return
to our own seat; adding, politely, that the highest
entertainment they could have, would be the company
and conversation of us, and our friends; and
that rather at our own seats, than any-where else. The
public diversions, he was pleased to say, might take
their attention afterwards. Now they were here,
they would not be in haste to return, provided Sir
Charles and his friends would answer the hope he had
given of accompanying them back to Italy. 
There is no repeating the polite and agreeable things,
that were said on all sides. 
Well then, my dear grandmamma, to cut short,
thus it was at last agreed upon: 
The Count of Belvedere, who, all the afternoon
and evening, received the highest marks of civility
and politeness from the admirable Clementina (which,
by the way, I am afraid will not promote his cure) proposes,
with Signors Sebastiano and Juliano, to pass a
month or six weeks in seeing every-thing which they
shall think worthy of their notice in and about this
great city; and then, after one farewel-visit to us, 

they intend to set out together for the Court of
Madrid; where the Count intends to stay some
months. 
We shall all set out, on Monday next, for Grandison-hall. 
Lord and Lady L. will follow us in a week or
fortnight. 
How will the poor dear Charlotte mutter! whispered
Lady L. to me: But she and her Lord will join us
as soon as possible. 
Mrs. Eleanor Grandison loves not the Hall, because
of the hardships she received from the late
owner of it, Sir Thomas; and thinks herself bound
by a rash vow which she made the last time she was
there, Never again to enter its gates: And she will
be delighted, Lady L. says, in attending, in the absence
of the fathers and mothers, the dear little infants
of her two nieces. 
Lady Clementina whispered me more than once,
how happy she should think herself in these excursions; 
and hoped all their healths would be established
by them. She said the sweetest, the most affectionate
things to me. Once she said, bidding me
call her nothing but my Clementina, that she should
be happy, if she were sure I loved her as much as she
loved me. I assured her, and that from my very
heart, that I dearly loved her. 
Surely it was a happy incident, my dear grandmamma,
that Lady Clementina took a step, which,
tho' at first it had a rash appearance, has been productive
of so much joy to all round (to the poor Count
of Belvedere excepted) and, in particular, to 
Your ever-dutiful, ever-grateful,
Harriet Grandison. 

