



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Mrs. Norton. 

Monday night, July 24. 
My dear Mrs. Norton,
Had I not fallen into fresh troubles, which disabled
me for several days from holding a pen, I should
not have forborn inquiring after your health, and that of
your son; for I should have been but too ready to impute
your own silence to the cause, to which, to my very great
concern, I find it was owing. I pray to Heaven, my dear
good friend, to give you comfort in the way most desireable
to yourself. 
I am exceedingly concerned at Miss Howe's writing
about me to my friends. I do assure you, that I was as
ignorant of her intention so to do, as of the contents of
her letter. Nor has she yet let me know (discouraged, I
suppose, by her ill success), that she did write. Impossible
to share the delight which such charming spirits give, 

without the inconvenience that will attend their volatility. 
—So mixed are our best enjoyments! 
It was but yesterday that I wrote to chide the dear creature
for freedoms of that nature, which her unseasonable
love for me had made her take, as you wrote me word
in your former. I was afraid, that all such freedoms would
be attributed to me. And I am sure, that nothing but
my own application to my friends, and a full conviction
of my contrition, will procure me favour. Least of all
can I expect, that either your mediation or hers (both
of whose fond and partial love of me is so well known)
will avail me. 
She then gives a brief account of the arrest: Of her dejection under
it: Of her apprehensions of being carried to her former lodgings: 
Of Mr. Lovelace's avowed innocence, as to that insult: Of her
release, by Mr. Belford: Of Mr. Lovelace's promise not to molest
her: Of her cloaths being sent her: Of the earnest desire of all his
friends, and of himself, to marry her: Of Miss Howe's advice to
comply with their requests: And, of her declared resolution rather
to die, than be his, sent to Miss Howe, to be given to his relations,
but as yesterday. After which, she thus proceeds: 
Now, my dear Mrs. Norton, you will be surprised,
perhaps, that I should have returned such an answer: But,
when you have every-thing before you, you, who know
me so well, will not think me wrong. And, besides, I am
upon a better preparation, than for an earthly husband. 
Nor let it be imagined, my dear and ever-venerable
friend, that my present turn of mind proceeds from gloominess
or melancholy; for altho' it was brought on by disappointment
(the world shewing me early, even at my first
rushing into it, its true and ugly face); yet, I hope, that
it has obtained a better root, and will every day more and
more, by its fruits, demonstrate to me, and to all my
friends, that it has. 
I have written to my sister. Last Friday I wrote. So
the dye is thrown. I hope for a gentle answer. But, perhaps,
they will not vouchsafe me any. It is my first direct
application, you know. I wish Miss Howe had left
me to my own workings, in this tender point. 
It will be a great satisfaction to me, to hear of your
perfect recovery; and that my foster-brother is out of
danger. But why said I, out of danger? —When can this
be justly said of creatures, who hold by so uncertain a tenure? 

This is one of those forms of common speech, that
proves the frailty and the presumption of poor mortals, at
the same time. 
Don't be uneasy you cannot answer your wishes to
be with me. I am happier than I could have expected to
be among mere strangers. It was grievous at first; but
use reconciles every-thing to us. The people of the house
where I am, are courteous and honest. There is a widow
who lodges in it (have I not said so formerly?), a good
woman; who is the better for having been a proficient
in the school of affliction. 
An excellent school! my dear Mrs. Norton, in which
we are taught to know ourselves, to be able to compasonate
and bear with one another, and to look up to a
better hope. 
I have as humane a physician (whose fees are his least
regard), and as worthy an apothecary, as ever patient
was visited by. My nurse is diligent, obliging, silent,
and sober. So I am not unhappy without: And within— 
I hope, my dear Mrs. Norton, that I shall be every day
more and more happy within. 
No doubt, it would be one of the greatest comforts I
could know, to have you with me: You, who love me so
dearly: Who have been the watchful sustainer of my
helpless infancy: You, by whose precepts I have been so
much benefited! —In your dear bosom could I repose all
my griefs. And by your piety, and experience in the
ways of Heaven, should I be strengthened in what I am
still to go through. 
But, as it must not be, I will acquiesce; and so, I
hope, will you: For you see in what respects I am not
unhappy; and in those that I am, they lie not in your
power to remedy. 
Then, as I have told you, I have all my cloaths in my
own possession. So I am rich enough, as to this world,
and in common conveniencies. 
So you see, my venerable and dear friend, that I am not
always turning the dark side of my prospects, in order to
move compassion; a trick imputed to me, too often, by
my hard-hearted sister; when, if I know my own heart,
it is above all trick or artifice. Yet I hope at last I shall
be so happy, as to receive benefit rather than reproach 

from this talent, if it be my talent. At last, I say; for
whose heart have I hitherto moved? —Not one, I am
sure, that was not predetermined in my favour! 
As to the day—I have passed it, as I ought to pass it— 
It has been a very heavy day to me! —More for my friends
sake, too, than for my own! —How did they use to pass
it! —What a Gala! —How have they now passed it! — 
To imagine it, how grievous! —Say not, that those are
cruel, who suffer so much for my fault; and who, for
eighteen years together, rejoiced in me, and rejoiced me,
by their indulgent goodness! —But I will think the rest! — 
Adieu, my dearest Mrs. Norton! —Adieu! 