



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Feb. 27. 
What odd heads some people have! —Miss
Clarissa Harlowe to be sacrificed in marriage
to Mr. Roger Solmes! —Astonishing! 
I must not, you say, give my advice in favour of this
man! —You now convince me, my dear, that you are
nearer of kin than I thought you, to the family that
could think of so preposterous a match, or you would
never have had the least notion of my advising in his
favour. 
Ask me for his picture. You know I have a good
hand at drawing an ugly likeness. But I'll see a little
further first: For who knows what may happen, since
matters are in such a train; and since you have not
the courage to oppose so overwhelming a torrent? 
You ask me to help you to a little of my spirit. 
Are you in earnest? But it will not now I doubt do
you service. —It will not sit naturally upon you. You
are your Mother's girl, think what you will; and have
violent spirits to contend with. Alas! my dear, you
should have borrowed some of mine a little sooner;— 
that is to say, before you had given the management
of your Estate into the hands of those who think they
have a prior claim to it. What tho' a Father's! — 
Has not that Father two elder children? —And do
they not both bear more of his stamp and image than 

you do? —Pray, my dear, call me not to account for
this free question; lest your application of my meaning,
on examination, prove to be as severe as that. 
Now I have launched out a little, indulge me one
word more in the same strain—I will be decent, I
promise you. I think you might have known, that
Avarice and Envy are two passions that are not
to be satisfied the one by giving, the other by the
envied person's continuing to deserve and excel. — 
Fuel, fuel both, all the world over, to flames insatiate
and devouring. 
But since you ask for my opinion, you must tell me
all you know or surmise of their inducements. And
if you will not forbid me to make extracts from your
Letters for the entertainment of my Aunt and Cousin
in the little Island, who long to hear more of your
affairs, it will be very obliging. 
But you are so tender of some people who have no
tenderness for any-body but themselves, that I must
conjure you to speak out. Remember, that a friendship
like ours admits of no reserves. You may trust
my impartiality. It would be an affront to your own
judgment, if you did not: For do you not ask my
advice? And have you not taught me that friendship
should never give a byas against justice? —Justify them
therefore if you can. Let us see if there be any sense,
whether sufficient reason or not, in their choice. At
present I cannot (and yet I know a good deal of your
family) have any conception how all of them, your
Mother and your Aunt Hervey in particular, can join
with the rest against judgments given. As to some of
the others, I cannot wonder at any-thing they do or
attempt to do where Self is concerned. 
You ask, Why may not your Brother be first engaged
in Wedlock? —I'll tell you why: His temper
and his arrogance are too well known to induce women
he would aspire to, to receive his addresses, notwithstanding
his great independent acquisitions and still 

greater prospects. Let me tell you, my dear, those
acquisitions have given him more pride than reputation. 
To me he is the most intolerable creature that
I ever conversed with. The treatment you blame,
he merited from one whom he addressed with the air
of a person who presumes that he is about to confer a
favour, rather than to receive one. I ever loved to
mortify proud and insolent spirits. What, think you,
makes me bear Hickman near me, but that the man is
humble, and knows and keeps his distance? 
As to your question, Why your elder Sister may
not be first provided for? I answer, Because she must
have no man, but one who has a great and clear
Estate; that's one thing. Another is, Because she
has a younger Sister. Pray, my dear, be so good as
to tell me, What man of a great and clear Estate
would think of that elder Sister, while the younger
were single? 
You are all too rich to be happy, child. For must
not each of you, by the constitutions of your family,
marry to be still richer? People who know in what
their main excellence consists, are not to be blamed
(are they?) for cultivating and improving what they
think most valuable? —Is true happiness any part of
your family view? —So far from it, that none of your
family but yourself could be happy were they not rich. 
So let them fret on, grumble and grudge, and accumulate; 
and wondering what ails them that they have
not happiness when they have riches, think the cause
is want of more; and so go on heaping up, till Death,
as greedy an accumulator as themselves, gathers them
into his garner. 
Well then once more I say, do you, my dear, tell
me what you know of their avowed and general motives; 
and I will tell you more than you will tell me of
their failings! Your Aunt Hervey, you say (a) , has
told you: Why must I ask you to let me know them 

when you condescend to ask my advice on the occasion? 
That they prohibit your corresponding with me, is
a wisdom I neither wonder at, nor blame them for: 
Since it is an evidence to me, that they know their
own folly: And if they do, is it strange that they
should be afraid to trust another's judgment upon it? 
I am glad you have found out a way to correspond
with me. I approve it much. I shall more, if this
first trial of it prove successful. But should it not,
and should it fall into their hands, it would not concern
me but for your sake. 
We have heard before you wrote, that all was not
right between your relations and you at your coming
home: That Mr. Solmes visited you, and that with
a prospect of success. But I concluded the mistake
lay in the person; and that his address was to Miss
Arabella. And indeed had she been as good-natured
as your plump ones generally are, I should have
thought her too good for him by half. This must
certainly be the thing, thought I; and my beloved
friend is sent for to advise and assist in her nuptial preparations. 
Who knows, said I to my Mother, but
that when the man has thrown aside his yellow full-buckled
peruke, and his broad-brimmed beaver (both
of which I suppose were Sir Oliver's Best of long
standing) he may cut a tolerable figure dangling to
church with Miss Bell! —The woman, as she observes,
should excel the man in features: And where
can she match so well for a foil? 
I indulged this surmise against rumour, because I
could not believe that the absurdest people in England
could be so very absurd as to think of this man
for you. 
We heard moreover, that you received no visiters. 
I could assign no reason for this; except that the preparations
for your Sister were to be private, and the
ceremony sudden, for fear this man should, as another 

man did, change his mind. Miss Lloyd and Miss
Biddulph were with me to enquire what I knew of
this; and of your not being at Church, either Morning
or Afternoon, the Sunday after your return from
us; to the disappointment of a little hundred of your
admirers, to use their words. It was easy for me to
guess the reason to be what you confirm—Their apprehensions
that Lovelace would be there, and attempt
to wait on you home. 
My Mother takes very kindly your compliments in
your Letter to her. Her words upon reading it
were; ‘Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an admirable young
Lady: Where-ever she goes, she confers a favour: 
Whomever she leaves, she fills with regret.’ —And
then a little comparative reflection; ‘O my Nancy,
that you had a little of her sweet obligingness!’ 
No matter. The praise was yours. You are me; 
and I enjoyed it. The more enjoyed it, because— 
Shall I tell you the truth? —Because I think myself as
well as I am—Were it but for this reason; That had
I twenty Brother James's, and twenty Sister Bell's,
not one of them, nor all of them joined together,
would dare to treat me as yours presume to treat you. 
The person who will bear much shall have much to
bear, all the world thro': 'Tis your own sentiment (a) 
grounded upon the strongest instance that can be given
in your own family; tho' you have so little improved
by it. 
The result is this, That I am fitter for this world
than you: You for the next than me;—that's the
difference. —But long, long, for my sake, and for
hundreds of sakes, may it be before you quit us for
company more congenial to you and more worthy
of you! 
I communicated to my Mother the account you
give of your strange reception; also what a horrid
wretch they have found out for you; and the compulsory 

treatment they give you. It only set her on
magnifying her lenity to me on my tyrannical behaviour,
as she will call it [Mothers must have their
way, you know, my dear] to the man whom she so
warmly recommends, against whom it seems there
can be no just exception; and expatiating upon the
complaisance I owe her for her indulgence. So I believe
I must communicate to her nothing farther— 
especially as I know she would condemn the correspondence
between us, and That between you and
Lovelace, as clandestine and undutiful proceedings,
and divulge our Secret besides: For duty implicit is
her cry. And moreover she lends a pretty open ear to
the preachments of that starch old Bachelor your Uncle
Antony; and for an example to her Daughter
would be more careful how she takes your part, be the
cause ever so just. 
Yet is not this right policy neither. For people who
allow nothing will be granted nothing: In other words,
those who aim at carrying too many points will not be
able to carry any. 
But can you divine, my dear, what that old preachment-making
plump-hearted soul your Uncle Antony
means by his frequent amblings hither? —There is
such smirking and smiling between my Mother and
him! Such mutual praises of Oeconomy; and ‘That
is my way!’—and ‘This I do!’—and ‘I am glad it
has your approbation, Sir!’—and ‘You look into
every-thing, Madam!’ —‘Nothing would be done,
if I did not!’ —Such exclamations against servants! 
Such exaltings of self! And dear-heart, and good lack!
—and 'las a-day! —And now-and-then their conversation
sinking into a whispering accent, if I come
cross them! —I'll tell you, my dear, I don't above
half like it. 
Only that these old Bachelors usually take as many
years to resolve upon Matrimony as they can reasonably
expect to live, or I should be ready to fire upon 

his visits; and to recommend Mr. Hickman to my
Mother's acceptance, as a much more eligible man: 
For what he wants in years, he makes up in gravity: 
And if you will not chide me, I will say, That there
is a primness in both (especially when the man has presumed
too much with me upon my Mother's favour
for him, and is under discipline on that account) as
makes them seem near of kin: And then in contemplation
of my sauciness, and what they both bear from
it, they sigh away!—and seem so mightily to compassionate
each other, that if Pity be but one remove
from Love, I am in no danger, while they both are in
a great deal, and don't know it. 
Now, my dear, I know you will be upon me with
your grave airs: So in for the lamb, as the saying is,
in for the sheep; and do you yourself look about you: 
For I'll have a pull with you by way of being aforehand. 
Hannibal, we read, always advised to attack
the Romans upon their own territories. 
You are pleased to say, and upon your word too! 
That your regards (a mighty quaint word for affections)
are not so much engaged, as some of your friends
suppose, to another person. What need you give one
to imagine, my dear, that the last month or two has
been a period extremely favourable to that other person!
—whom it has made an obliger of the Niece for
his patience with the Uncles. 
But, to pass that by—So much engaged! —How
much, my dear? —Shall I infer? Some of your friends
suppose a great deal. You seem to own a little. 
Don't be angry. It is all fair: Because you have
not acknowleged to me That little. People I have
heard you say, who affect secrets, always excite curiosity. 
But you proceed with a kind of drawback upon
your averrment, as if recollection had given you a
doubt—You know not yourself, if they be [so much
engaged]. Was it necessary to say This, to me?— 

and to say it upon your word too? —But you know
best. —Yet you don't neither I believe. For a beginning
Love is acted by a subtle spirit; and oftentimes
discovers itself to a by-stander, when the person possessed
(why should I not call it possessed?) knows not it
has such a demon. 
But further you say, What PREFERABLE favour
you may have for him to any other person, is owing more
to the usage he has received, and for your sake borne,
than to any personal consideration. 
This is generously said. It is in character. But, O
my friend, depend upon it, you are in danger. Depend
upon it, whether you know it or not, you are a little
in for't. Your native generosity and greatness of mind
endanger you: All your friends, by fighting against
him with impolitic violence, fight for him. And
Lovelace, my life for yours, notwithstanding all his
veneration and assiduities, has seen further than that
veneration and those assiduities (so well calculated to
your meridian) will let him own he has seen—Has
seen, in short, that his work is doing for him more
effectually than he could do it for himself. And have
you not before now said, That nothing is so penetrating
as the Eye of a Lover who has vanity? And
who says Lovelace wants vanity? 
In short, my dear, it is my opinion, and that from
the easiness of his heart and behaviour, that he has seen
more than I have seen; more than you think could be
seen;—more than I believe you yourself know, or else
you would have let me know it. 
Already, in order to restrain him from resenting the
indignities he has received, and which are daily offered
him, he has prevailed upon you to correspond with
him privately. I know he has nothing to boast of
from what you have written: But is not his inducing
you to receive his Letters, and to answer them, a great
point gained? By your insisting that he should keep
this correspondence private, it appears that there is one 

secret which you do not wish the world should know: 
And he is master of that secret. He is indeed himself,
as I may say, that secret! What an intimacy does this
beget for the Lover! How is it distancing the Parent! 
Yet who, as things are situated, can blame you? — 
Your condescension has no doubt hitherto prevented
great mischiefs. It must be continued, for the same
reasons, while the cause remains. You are drawn in
by a perverse fate against inclination: But custom,
with such laudable purposes, will reconcile the inconveniency
and make an inclination. —And I would advise
you (as you would wish to manage on an occasion
so critical with that prudence which governs all your
actions) not to be afraid of entering upon a close examination
into the true springs and grounds of this
your generosity to that happy man. 
It is my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that
on enquiry it will come out to be LOVE—Don't start,
my dear! —Has not your man himself had natural
philosophy enough to observe already to your Aunt
Hervey, that Love takes the deepest root in the steadiest
minds? The duce take his sly penetration, I was
going to say; for this was Six or Seven weeks ago. 
I have been tinctured, you know. Nor on the
coolest reflection, could I account how and when the
jaundice began: But had been over head and ears, as
the saying is, but for some of that advice from you
which I now return you. Yet my man was not half
so—So what, my dear—To be sure Lovelace is a
charming fellow. And were he only—But I will not
make you glow, as you read—Upon my word I will
not. —Yet, my dear, don't you find at your heart
somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, throb, as
you read just here? —If you do, don't be ashamed to
own it—It is your generosity, my Love! that's all. — 
But, as the Roman augur said, Cæsar, beware of the
Ides of March! 
Adieu, my dearest friend. —Forgive, and very 

speedily, by the new-found expedient, tell me, that
you forgive, 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 