


Lady G. To Lady L. In Continuation. 


This happy event has been so long wished for by
us all; we are so much delighted with the Bride,
as well as the Bridegroom; so many uncertainties, so
many suspenses, have fallen in; so little likelihood
once that it ever would have been; and you are so
miserably tied by the leg, poor Caroline! and so little
to divert you, besides the once smiling to the ten times
squalling of your little stranger; that Compassion,
Love, both, incite me to be minute; that so you may 

be as much with us in idea, as we all wished you could
have been in person. 
Crouds of people lined the way, in our return from
Church, as well as in our way to it; and blessings
were pronounced upon the Happy Pair, by hundreds,
at their alighting at Selby-house. 
When we were all assembled in the Great Hall,
mutual congratulations flowed from every mouth:
Then did every man salute the happy, happy Bride:
Then did the equally-happy Bridegroom salute every
Lady—There was among us the height of Joy; Joy
becoming the awful Solemnity; and every one was
full of the decency and delight which were given and
shewn by the crouds of spectators of all ranks, and
both Sexes; a delight and decency worthy of the characters
of the admirable Pair: And Miss Nedham
declared, and all the young Ladies joined with her,
that if she could be secure of the like good behaviour
and encouragement, she would never think of a
Private Wedding for herself. Mr. Selby himself was
overjoyed too much, even to utter a jest! Now, now,
he said, he had attained the height of his ambition. 
The dear Harriet could look up: She could smile
around her. I led her, with Lucy, into the Cedarparlour
—Now, my dear Love, said I, the moment
we entered it, throwing my arms about her, just as
her lips were joyfully opening to speak to me, do I
salute my real Sister, my Sister Grandison, in my dear
Lady L's name, as well as in my own: God Almighty
confirm and establish your happiness! 
My dearest, dearest Lady G. how grateful, how
encouraging, to my heart, is your kind Salutation! 
Your continued Love, and that of my dear Lady L.
will be essential to my happiness. 
May our Hearts be ever united! replied I. But
they must: For were not our Minds kindred Minds
before? 
But you must love my Lucy, said she, presenting 

her to me. —You must love my Grand. 
—Mamma, said I, catching the word from her,
your Aunt, your Uncle, your Cousins, and your
Cousins Cousins, to the twentieth Generation— 
And so I will: Ours yours; Yours ours! We are
all of one Family, and will be for ever. 
What a happy creature am I! replied she—How
many people can one good man make so! —But where,
where is my Emily, sweet girl? Bring to me, Lucy,
bring to me, my Emily! 
Lucy went out, and led in the sweet girl. With
hands and eyes uplifted, My dear Miss Byron, that
was, now Lady Grandison, said she, love me; love
your Emily. I am now your Emily, your Ward; 
love me as well as you did when Miss Byron. 
Harriet threw her arms about her neck; I do, I
will, I must: You shall be my Sister, my Friend; 
my Emily now, indeed! Love me, as I will love you; 
and you shall find your happiness in mine. 
Sir Charles entered; his Beauchamp in his hand. 
Quitting his, and taking hers, he kissed it. Once
more, said he, do I thank my dearest Life for the honour
she has done me: Then resuming, with his
other hand, his Beauchamp's, he presented each to the
other, as Brother and Sister. 
Beauchamp, in a graceful manner, bowed on her
hand: She courtesied to him with an air of dignity
and esteem. 
He then turning to Emily; Acknowlege, my
dear, said he, your elder Sister: My Harriet will
love her Emily. Receive, my dearest Life, your
Ward. Yet (to Emily) I acquit not myself of the
power, any more than of the will, of obliging you at
first hand. 
O Sir! said the sobbing girl, you are all goodness! 
But I will make no request to you, but through my
dearest Lady Grandison's mediation. If she approve
of it first, I shall not doubt of its fitness to be complied
with. 

Was not that pretty, in Emily? —O how Beauchamp's
eyes loved her! 
But why, Ladies, said Sir Charles, do you sequester
yourselves from the company? Are we not all of a
Family to-day? The four little Flora's, with their
baskets in their hands, were entering the gate, as I
came in: Receive them, my Love, with your usual
graciousness. We will join the company, and call
them in. My Beauchamp, you are a Brideman; restore
my Bride to her friends and admirers within. 
He took Emily's hand. She looked so proud! — 
Harriet gave hers to Beauchamp. We followed them
into the Great Hall: Mr. Selby had archness in his
look, and seemed ready to blame us for withdrawing. 
—Sir Charles was aware of him. My dear Mr.
Selby, said he, Will you not allow us to see the
pretty Flora's? —By all means, said Mr. Selby; and
hurried out, and introduced them. Sweet pretty
girls! We had more leisure to consider the elegant
rusticity of their dresses and appearance. They had
their baskets in their hands, and a courtesy and a
blush ready for every one in company. Sir Charles
seemed to expect that his Bride would take notice of
them first; but observing that she wanted presence of
mind, he stept to them, took each by the hand, the
youngest first, called them pretty Loves; I wish, said
he, I could present you with as pretty flowers as you
threw away in honour to this company; putting into
each basket, wrapped up in paper, five guineas:
Then presented them, two in each hand, to his Bride; 
who, by that time, was better prepared to receive
them with that sweet ease and familiarity which give
grace to all she says and does. 
The children afterwards desiring to go to their parents,
the polite Beauchamp himself, accompanied by
Lucy, led them to them, and returned, with a request
from all the tenants, that they might have the honour,
some time in the day, to see the Bride and Bridegroom 

among them, were it but for two minutes. What
says my Love? said Sir Charles. O, Sir! I cannot,
cannot—Well, then, I will attend them, to make
your excuse, as well as I can. She bowed her
thanks. 
The time before dinner was devoted to conversation. 
Sir Charles was nobody's; no, not very particularly
his Bride's: He put every one upon speaking
in turn. For about half an hour he sat between the
joyful Mrs. Shirley and Mrs. Selby; but even then,
in talking to them, talked to the whole company:
Yet, in his air and manner to both, shewed so much
respect, as needed not the aid of a particular address
to them in words. 
This was observed to me by good Lord L. For
Harriet (uneasy, every eye continually upon her,
thoughtful, bashful) withdrawing, a little before dinner,
with a cast of her eye to me, I followed her to
her dressing-room. There, with so much expressiveness
of meaning, tho' not of language; so much
tenderness of love; so much pious gratitude; so
much true virgin sensibility; did she open her heart
to me; that I shall ever revolve what passed in that
conversation, as the true criterion of Virgin Delicacy
unmingled with Affectation. Nor was I displeased,
that, in the height of her grateful Self congratulation,
she more than once acknowleged a sigh for the admirable
Clementina. We just began to express our
pleasure and our hopes in the good behaviour of our
Emily, when we were called to dinner. 
It was a sumptuous one. 
Mr. Selby was very orderly, upon the whole: But
he remembered, he said, that when he was married
(and he called upon his Dame to confirm it) he was
obliged to wait on his Bride, and the Company; and
he insisted upon it, that Sir Charles should. 
No, no, no, every one said; and the Bride looked
a little serious upon it: But Sir Charles, with an air 

of gaiety that infinitely became him, took a napkin
from the butler; and, putting it under his arm, I have
only one request to make you, my dear Mr. Selby— 
When I am more aukward than I ought to be, do you
correct me; and I shall have both pride and pleasure
in the task. 
Adad! said Mr. Selby, looking at him with pleasure— 
You may be any-thing, do any-thing; you
cannot conceal the Gentleman. Ads-heart, you must
always be the first man in company—Pardon me, my
Lords. 
Sir Charles was the modestest servitor that ever
waited at table, while his napkin was under his arm:
But he laid it down, while he addressed himself to the
company, finding something to say to each, in his
pithy, agreeable manner, as he went round the table. 
He made every one happy. With what delight did
the elder Ladies look upon him, when he addressed
himself to each of them! He stopt at the Bride's
chair, and made her a compliment with an air of
tenderness. I heard not what it was, sitting at distance; 
but she looked grateful, pleased; smiled, and
blushed. He passed from her to the Bride-maids, and
again complimented each of them. They also seemed
delighted with what he said. Then going to Mr.
Selby; Why don't you bid me resume the napkin,
Sir? —No, no; we see what you can do: Your conformity
is enough for me. You may now sit down,
when you please. You make the waiters look aukward. 
He took his seat, thanked Mr. Selby for having reminded
him of his duty, as he called it, and was all
Himself, the most graceful and obliging of men. 
You know, my dear Lady L. how much I love to
praise my brother. Neither I, nor the young Ladies,
not even those who had humble servants present, regarded
any-body but him. My poor Lord! —I am
glad, however, that he has a tolerable good set of 

teeth—They were always visible. A good honest fort
of man, tho', Lady L. whatever you may think of
him. 
After dinner, at Mr. Selby's reminding motion,
Sir Charles and the men went to the tenants. They
all wished him joy; and, as they would not sit down,
while he stood, Sir Charles took a seat among them,
and all the rest followed his example. 
One of the honest men, it seems, remembred the
Nuptials of Mr. and Mrs. Byron, and praised them
as the best and happiest of the human race: Others
confirmed his character of both: Another knew the
late Mr. Shirley, and extolled him as much: Another
remembred the birth, another the christening, of
the Bride; and others talked of what an excellent
creature she was from infancy. Let me tell you,
Sir, said one grey-headed man, you will have much
ado to deserve her; and yet you are said to be as good
as you are handsome. The women took up the cause:
They were sure, by what they had heard, if any man
in the world could deserve the Bride, it was Sir Charles
Grandison; and they would swear for him by his
looks. One of the honest men said, they should all
have taken it as an hugeous favour, were they allowed
to wish the Bride joy, tho' at ever so great a distance. 
Sir Charles said, He was sure the women would
excuse her this day; and then the men would, in
complaisance to them. We will hope, said he, looking
all round him, before we leave Northamptonshire,
for one happy dinner together. 
They all got up to bow and courtesy, and looked
upon each other; and the men, who are most of
them freeholders, wished to the Lord for a new
election, and that he would come among them. 
They had no great matter of fault to find, they said,
with their present representatives; but any-body who
would oppose Sir Charles Grandison, would stand no
chance. The women joined in the declaration, as if 

they thought highly, as Sir Charles pleasantly observed,
of their own influence over their husbands. 
They all wondered that he was not in Parliament,
till they heard how little a while he had been in England. 
He took leave of the good people (who, by their
behaviour and appearance, did as much credit to their
landlords as to themselves) with his usual affability
and politeness; repeating his promise of a day of Jubilee,
as some of them called it. 
The Ball, at the request of the whole company,
was opened by the Bride and Bridegroom. She was
very uneasy at the general Call. Sir Charles saw she
was, and would have taken out Miss Nedham; but
it was not permitted. The dear creature, I believe,
did her best at the time; but I have seen her perform
better: Yet she did exceedingly well. But such a
figure herself, and such a partner; How could she do
amiss? 
Emily was taken out by Beauchamp. He did his
best, I am sure; and almost as much excelled his
pretty partner, as his beloved friend did his. 
Emily, sitting down by me, asked if she did not
perform very ill. Not very ill, my dear, said I; but
not so well as I have seen you dance. I don't know,
said she, what ails me: My heart is very heavy,
madam. What can be the meaning of it? But
don't tell Lady Grandison so. —High ho! —Lady
Grandison! What a sound is that? A charming
sound! But how shall I bring my lips to be familiarized
to it? 
You are glad she is married, my love, I dare
say? 
Glad! To be sure I am! It is an event that I have
long, long wished for: But new names, and new titles,
one knows not how to frame one's mouth to
presently. It was some time before I could call you 

Lady G. But don't you pity poor Lady Clementina,
a little, madam? 
A great deal, I do. But as she refused my brother— 
Ah! dear! that's the thing! I wonder she could— 
when he would have let her have the free exercise of
her Religion. 
Had you rather your Guardian had had Lady Clementina,
Emily? 
O no! How can you ask me such a question,
madam? Of all the women in the world, I wished
him to have Miss Byron. But she is too happy for
pity, you know, madam! —Bless me! What does
she look so thoughtful for? Why does she sigh so? 
Surely she can't be sorry! 
Sorry! No, my Love! But a change of condition
for life! New attachments! A new course of life! 
Her name sunk, and lost! The property, person and
will, of another, excellent as the man is; obliged to
go to a new house; to be ingrafted into a new family; 
to leave her own, who so dearly love her; an
irrevocable destiny! —Do you think, Emily, new in
her present circumstances; every eye upon her; it is
not enough to make a considerate mind, as hers is,
thoughtful! 
All these are mighty hardships, madam! putting
up her lip—But, Lady G. can you suppose she thinks
them so? If she does—But she is a dear good Lady! — 
I shall ever love her! She is an ornament of our Sex! 
See, how lovely she looks! Did your Ladyship ever
see so sweet a creature? I never did. 
Not for Beauty, Dignity, Ease, Figure, Modesty,
good Sense, did I ever! 
She is my Guardianess, may I say? Is there such a
word? —I shall be as proud of her, as I am of my
Guardian. Yet there is no cause of sighing, I think! 
—See my Guardian! her Husband! Unfashionable 

as the word is, it is a pretty word. The House-band,
that ties all together. Is not that the meaning? — 
Look round! How does he surpass all men! —His
Ease, talke of Ease! His Dignity, talk of Dignity! 
As handsome a man, as she is a woman! See how
every young Lady eyes him; every young Gentleman
endeavours to imitate him. I wish he would take me
out; I would do better. 
This was the substance of the whispering Dialogue
that passed between Emily and me—Poor girl! 
Mr. Selby danced with Lucy, and got great applause. 
He was resolved, he said, to have one dance
with the Bride. She besought him not to think of it. 
Her grandmamma, her aunt, intreated for her. She
desired Sir Charles to interpose—If, my dearest Life,
you could oblige your uncle—I cannot, cannot think
of it, said she. 
Lady G. said Sir Charles, be so good as to challenge
Mr. Selby. I stood forth, and offered my hand
to him. He could not refuse it. He did not perform
so well as he did with Lucy. Go, said I, when we had
done, sit down by your Dame, and be quiet: You
have lost all your credit. You dance with a Bride! — 
Some people know not how to bear applause; nor to
leave off when they are well. Lord L. took out Mrs.
Selby. She dances very gracefully. My Lord, you
know, is above praise. The young Lord Reresby and
Miss Falconbridge distinguished themselves. My odd
creature was in his element. He and Miss Barclay,
and another time he and Emily, did very handsomely; 
and the girl got up her reputation. Lord W. did
hobble, and not ungracefully, with old Mrs. Selby; 
who had not danced, she said, for twenty years before; 
but, on so joyful an occasion, would not refuse Lord
W's challenge: And both were applauded; the time
of life of the Lady, the limpingness of my Lord, considered. 

There was a very plentiful sideboard, of rich wines,
sweetmeats, &c. We all disclaimed formal supper. 
We went afterwards into country-dances. Mrs.
Shirley retired about Ten. Harriet took the opportunity
of attending her; and it was a seasonable relief
to her. I had an intimation to attend her. I found
her just dropt on her knees to her grandmamma; 
who, with her arms about her neck, was folding to
her fond heart the darling of it. The sweet girl was
so apprehensive! —I was called upon to give my opinion,
whether she should return to the company, or
not: I gave it, that she should; and that she should
retire, for the night, about Eleven. As to the Bridemaids,
I said, I would manage, that they should only
attend her to her chamber, and leave her there, with
her aunt, Lucy, and me. Lord L. undertook to
make the gentlemen give up form; which, he said,
they would the more easily do, as they were set into
dancing. 
After all, Lady L. we women, dressed out in ribbands,
and gaudy trappings, and in Virgin-white, on
our Wedding-days, seem but like milk-white heifers
led to sacrifice. We ought to be indulged, if we are
not shameless things, and very wrong indeed, in our
choice of the man we can love. 
We returned to company. The Bridegroom was
looking out for us. My dearest Life, said he, Are
you returned? —I thought—There he stopt. 
Mr. Selby broke from his partner, Miss Barclay, to
whisk into the figure the Bride. Sir Charles joined
the deserted Lady, who seemed much better pleased
with her new partner than with her old one. Lord W.
who was sitting down, took Mrs. Selby, and led her
into the dance. 
I drew Miss Nedham to the sideboard, and gave
her her cue: She gave theirs to the three other Bridemaids. 

About Eleven, Mrs. Selby, unobserved, withdrew
with the Bride. The Bride-maids, one by one,
waited on her to her chamber; saluted her, and returned
to company. 
The dear creature wanted presence of mind. She
fell into my reflexion above. O my dear Lady G!
said she, was I not right when I declared, that I never
would marry, were it not to the man I loved above
all the men in the world? 
She complimented me twenty times, with being very
good. She prayed for me; but her prayers were
meant for herself. You remember, that she told me,
on my apprehensiveness on the like occasion, that fear
made me loving to her. On her blessing me, Ah,
Harriet, said I, you now find, that apprehension will
make one pious, as well as loving. 
My Sister, my Friend, my own, my Caroline's,
my Brother's, dear Lady Grandison! said I, when I
left her, near undressed, God bless you! And God be
praised, that I can call you by these tender names! 
My Brother is the happiest of men; You of women. 
May we never love each other less than we do now. 
Look forward to the serene happiness of your future
lot. If you are the Joy of our Brother, you must be
our Joy; and the Jewel of our Family. 
She answered me only by a fervent embrace, her
eyes lifted up, surcharged, as I may say, with tears of
joy, as in thankfulness. 
I then rushed down-stairs, and into the company. 
My brother instantly addressed me—My Harriet,
whispered he, with impatience, returns not this
night. 
You will see Mrs. Selby, I presume, by-and-by, returned
I. 
He took his seat by old Mrs. Selby, and fell into
talk with her, to avoid joining in the dances. His
eye was continually turned to the door. Mrs. Selby, 

at last, came in. Her eyes shewed the tender leave
she had taken of her Harriet. 
My brother approached her. She went out: He
followed her. In a quarter of an hour she returned. 
We saw my brother no more that night. 
We continued our dancings till between Three and
Four. 
I have often observed, that we women, whether
weakly or robust, are hardly ever tired with dancing. 
It was so with us. The men, poor souls! looked
silly, and sleepy, by two; all but my ape: He has a
good many Femalities, as uncle Selby calls them. But
he was brought up to be idle and useless, as women
generally are. I must conclude my Letters whimsically,
my dear: If I did not, you would not know
them to be written by 
Your Charlotte G. 

