


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


I Went, according to promise, in the morning, to
the palace of Porretta. I found all the family, the
Marchioness and Lady Clementina excepted, in Jeronymo's
chamber. My entrance, I suppose, was
solemn; for Jeronymo, as I approached him, snatching
my hand, said, This girl, this capricious, this uncommon
girl! How can I forgive her for vexing the
heart of my Grandison? 
Father Marescotti looked so conscious, that I pitied
him. I took his hand, and, with an air of kindness,
asked him—Are there any hopes, my good Father, 

that I shall have the honour of calling you one
of my dearest houshold friends in England? 
I gave him no time to answer, lest he should not be
assured enough: And addressing myself to the Bishop,
My Lord, I ask you the like question: Is there a
likelihood, that I shall have an interest in Father Marescotti's
more intimate friendship? We already, I
answer for myself, and from my vanity, love each
other. 
Dear Grandison! said the Marquis; and, taking my
hand, he called me by the kindest name—Saving, that
it was not Son! Jeronymo dried his eyes. The Count
saluted me in a tender accent. The Bishop was silent. 
I see, thought I, that the admirable Clementina
perseveres! —Religion, that can do so much for her,
will not, I hope, leave me unbenefited by its all-chearing
influence. If I cannot be so happy as I wish,
I am in the hands of Providence; and will not give
myself up to unmanly despair—Yet the greatness of
this woman's mind! thought I—Why did they not
fall upon indulgent methods with her before? Then,
probably, had there not been a supposed reason for an
invitation to me to quit my native country, to which
I had been so long a stranger, and to come over to
Italy! —Then had she, in all likelihood, recovered
her reason, and I had not known how great she could
be; and her filial duty would have disengaged me
equally from all obligations of honour, and expectations
of favour! 
The Marchioness came in soon after. Her address
to me confirmed me in my apprehensions—Dear Grandison,
said she, condescendingly laying her hand on
mine, how do you? See our dear Jeronymo—How
much better he is—What return can we make to
you for your goodness to him? I went up to the dear
girl last night, after you were gone. She was then indeed
a little hysterical. But the disorder went off in
prayers for you and for herself. I am just come from 

her. She has had a quiet night. She is calm, and,
I may say, serene. All her cares are in what manner
to shew her gratitude to you. 
It is impossible, madam, but I must have joy in your
joy. Lady Clementina, I apprehend, perseveres in
her resolution!— 
I have talked to her, Chevalier, in your favour. 
If you love her, she says, as we all think you do, she
will yet be yours. 
Dear madam (overjoyed) tell me— 
Let me interrupt you, Chevalier: I must not mislead
you, nor keep you in suspense—She will, she
says, beg your acceptance of her vows—if— 
If what, madam— 
Hear me with patience, Chevalier—If you will
comply with the conditions, on which we would have
permitted her to be yours, when you were last in
Italy—This is her own proposal—Made at her own
motion—She is afraid it will be to no purpose (she
says afraid, Sir): But as you have not denied her to
herself, she begs I will put the question to you in her
name, for the sake (if you should refuse her) of her
own future tranquillity of mind. The Chevalier Grandison
is generous; he is just; he is polite: He cannot
but receive this motion of my child by her mother, as
the greatest condescension from both. 
I bowed. I was going to speak; but they all severally
broke in upon me. 
On my knees, Chevalier, said Father Marescotti,
I will entreat you! 
O Chevalier, said the Bishop, how happy is it in
your power to make us all! 
Surely you can, you will, you must, Chevalier! said
the Count, if you love the dear creature, as we all
suppose you do. 
You will not, I hope, dear Grandison, said the
Marquis, refuse my daughter. Ask any conditions of
us—She shall be with you in England in a month's 

time. We will accompany her thither; and stay
till you shall choose to return with us. 
Jeronymo, with sobs, caught my hand as I sat next
him—For God's sake, for my sake, for all our sakes,
for your soul's sake, my Grandison, be ours. Let
your Jeronymo call you Brother. 
If my tears, if my prayers, have weight, said the
Marchioness, let me call down my child, and she
shall give you her hand in our presence. She thinks,
besides the regard she has for your soul, that she ought
to insist upon the terms on which we would have consented
to make her yours, in gratitude for our compliance
with her wishes. 
Dearest Grandison! rejoined the Bishop, Refuse not
my sister: Refuse not the daughter of the Marchese
and Marchesa della Porretta: Refuse not the assenting
Clementina. 
They were all silent; their eyes were upon me. 
It is, answered I, too, too condescendingly generous
to put this task upon me: But, Refuse Lady Clementina,
said you! How you wound my soul by the supposition! 
I see your compassion for me, in the light
you cannot but mean I should. Lady Clementina's
generously and condescendingly meant proposal, when
I am willing to allow terms to her, that she will not
to me, shews me how important she thinks the difference
between the two religions: Need I repeat, my
Lord (to the Bishop) what my own thoughts are upon
this subject? Would to heaven the terms were no
other than those before agreed to; or were such as I
could comply with! I have only to console myself,
that the power of Refusal lies where it ought to lie. 
Clementina is an angel. I am not worthy of her. 
Yet, let me add, this company (bowing round me)
cannot think me too solemn—Were I to live always
here; were I convinced that there is no life after this; 
your commands and Clementina's would be Laws to me. 
But has she not the goodness to say, in her paper, “That 

I have the same notion she has of the brevity and
vanity of this world's glory, and of the duration of
that to come?” 
They looked upon one another. It is hard, very
hard, said the Bishop, for a man, convinced of the
truth of his religion, to allow to another of a different
persuasion, what he expects should be allowed for himself. 
You, Chevalier, however, can allow it; and
have greatness of mind enough to judge favourably of
those who cannot. I do love you; but fain would I
love you more. 
The Marchioness wept. My dear Love, said the
Marquis, taking her hand with the tenderness of a
Lover, but speaking a little too severely of me for his
usual generosity—How many tears has this affair cost
you! My heart bleeds to see you weep. Comfort
yourself. Let us comfort each other. The Chevalier
Grandison is indeed unworthy of our child; unworthy
of the terms we offered to him; unworthy of our
joint entreaties—He is an invincible man. 
I was greatly affected. After a little hesitation,
I ask leave, my Lords, said I, to retire for one moment. 
I will return as soon as I have recovered myself
from the concern given me by the—mis-apprehension
(shall I call it?) of the best of men, whom from
my heart I reverence. 
I arose as I spoke, withdrew, and took two or three
turns in the salon. 
I staid not till I was sent for: But assuming as chearful
an air as I could, returned; and found them earnest
in talk. They all arose at my return, seemingly pleased
with it; and the Marquis coming to me, Chevalier,
said he, I am sorry— 
Not one word of apology, my Lord, interrupted I. 
I withdrew not from disrespect, or in resentment; 
but purely from concern, that, in your opinion, I deserved
not the honour done me, by one so dear to
you. Think me unhappy, my Lord, and pity me. 

Principle, not perverseness, influences me: It does
every one present: It does the dear Lady above: And
shall we not allow for one another, when we are all
actuated by the same motive? 
O that I could embrace my fourth son! said the
Marchioness. The Bishop threw his arms about me. 
Generous expansion of heart! were the words that
fell from his lips. Jeronymo shewed his friendly Love
in what he said: And must not, said the Count, this
young man be one of us? 
After chocolate, the Marchioness withdrew to the
window, making a motion to me to attend her. I
hastened to her. She complimented me, speaking
low, as a fit person to be consulted in a case where female
delicacy was concerned; and then asked me,
what I would have her say to Clementina, who had
offered her hand to me on conditions, with which she
had hopes I would comply? Must I tell the dear child,
she is rejected? 
Lady Clementina rejected! —Dear madam, how can
I bear that she should but suppose it? —Be pleased to
tell her, that I have been again sounded on the subject
of a change of religion, if her favour for me could be
procured: But that I was so steady in my faith, that
there were no hopes of my conversion, as you will
call it: And be so good as to remind her (it may look
like a breach of conditions if I do) that I require not
a change in her; and that therefore the terms proposed
are unequal. 
Fain, very fain, Chevalier, would I—She stopt
there—But no more on this subject. I will see in
what way the dear creature is now. 
She left me, and went to her daughter. The subject
was changed. 
In about half an hour she returned. She told me,
that she had followed my advice; but that Clementina
seemed dissatisfied and perplexed: And, as she had not
asked to see me, advised me to suspend my attendance 

on her till the afternoon, as she would by that means
have more time to compose her spirits; and herself further
opportunities of talking with her. 
Declining their invitation to dinner, I went to my
lodgings; and to amuse myself, had recourse to my
pen. 
Having written thus far, I lay it down till my return
from them. 

