


She is surprized at my learning—communicates
her performances to me—I impart
some of mine to her—am mortified
at her faint praise—Narcissa approves
of my production—I gain an involuntary
conquest over the cook-wench and dairy-maid
—their mutual resentment and insinuations
—the jealousy of their lovers. 
During this season of love and tranquility,
my muse, which had lain dormant so
long, awoke, and produced several small performances
on the subject of my flame: But as it
concerned me nearly to remain undiscovered in
my real character and sentiments, I was under a
necessity of mortifying my desire of praise, by
confining my works to my own perusal and
applause. —In the mean time I strove to insinuate
myself into the good opinion of both ladies; 
and succeeded so well, by my diligence and dutiful
behaviour, that in a little time, I was at least a
favourite servant; and frequently enjoyed the
pleasure of hearing myself mentioned in French
and Italian, with some degree of warmth and
surprize, by the dear object of all my wishes, as
a person who had so much of the gentleman in
my appearance and discourse, that she could not
for her soul treat me like a common lacquey. — 
and modesty were not long proof 

against these bewitching compliments. One day,
while I waited at dinner, the conversation turned
upon a knotty passage of Tasso's Gierusalem,
which, it seems, had puzzled them both: After a
great many unsatisfactory conjectures, my mistress
taking the book out of her pocket, turned up
the place in question, and read the sentence over
and over without success; at length, despairing
of finding the author's meaning, she turned to
me, saying, “Come hither, Bruno, let us see
what fortune will do for us; I will interpret
to thee what goes before and what follows
this obscure paragraph, the particular words of
which I will also explain, that thou may'st,
by comparing one with another, guess the
sense of that which perplexes us.” —I was too
vain to let slip this opportunity of displaying my
talents, therefore, without hesitation, read and
explained the whole of that which had disconcerted
them, to the utter astonishment of both. 
—Narcissa's face and lovely neck were overspread
with blushes, from whence I drew a favourable
omen, while her aunt, after having stared at me
a good while with a look of amazement, exclaimed,
“In the name of heaven! Who art
thou?” —I told her I had picked up a smattering
of Italian, during a voyage up the Straits. 
—At this she shook her head, and observed, that
no smatterer could read as I had done. —She then
desired to know if I understood French, to which
I answering in the affirmative: She asked if I was
acquainted with the Latin and Greek; I replied,
“A little.” —“Oho! (continued she) and with
philosophy and mathematicks, I suppose?” — 
I owned, I knew something of each. —Whereupon
she repeated her stare and interrogation. — 

I began to repent my vanity, and in order to repair
the fault I had committed, said, it was not
to be wondered at if I had a tolerable education,
because learning was so cheap in my country,
that every peasant was a scholar; but I hoped
her ladyship would think my understanding no exception
to my character. —She was pleased to answer,
“No, no, God forbid.” —But during the
rest of the time they sat at table, they behaved
with remarkable reserve. 
This alteration gave me much uneasiness; and
I passed the night without sleep, in melancholy
reflections on the vanity of young men, which
prompts them to commit so many foolish actions,
contrary to their own sober judgment. —Next
day, however, instead of profiting by this self-condemnation,
I yielded still more to the dictates
of the principle I had endeavoured to chastize,
and if fortune had not befriended me more than
prudence could expect, I should have been treated
with the contempt I deserved. —After breakfast,
my lady, who was a true author, bid me follow
her into the study, where she expressed herself
thus: “Since you are so learned, you cannot
be void of taste; therefore I am to desire your
opinion of a small performance in poetry,
which I lately composed. —You must know,
I have planned a tragedy, the subject of which
shall be the murder of a prince before the altar,
where he is busy at his devotions. —After
the deed is perpetrated, the regicide will
harrangue the people, with the bloody dagger
in his hand; and I have already composed a
speech, which I think will suit the character
extremely. —Here it is.” —Then taking up a 

scrape of paper, she read with violent emphasis
and gesture, as follows: 
“Thus have I sent the simple king to hell,
“Without or coffin, shroud, or passing-bell:—
“To me, what are divine and human laws?
“I court no sanction but my own applause!
“Rapes, robb'ries, treasons yield my soul delight;
“And human carnage gratifies my sight:
“I drag the parent by the hoary hair,
“And toss the sprawling infant on my spear,
“While the fond mother's cries regale mine ear.
“I fight, I vanquish, murder friends and foes;
“Nor dare th'immortal gods my rage oppose.”
Though I did great violence to my understanding
in praising this unnatural rhapsody, I nevertheless
extolled it as a production that of itself
deserved immortal fame; and beseeched her ladyship
to bless the world with the fruits of those uncommon
talents heaven had bestowed upon her. 
—She smiled with a look of self-complacency,
and encouraged by the incense I had offered,
communicated all her poetical works, which I
applauded one by one, with as little candour as
I had shewn at first. —Satiated with my flattery,
which I hope my situation justified, she
could not in conscience refuse me an opportunity
of shining in my turn; and therefore, after a compliment
to my nice discernment and taste, observed,
that doubtless I must have produced
something in that way myself, which she desired
to see. —This was a temptation I could by no
means resist. —I owned that while I was at 

college, I wrote some small detached pieces, at
the desire of a friend who was in love; and
at her request, repeated the following verses,
which indeed my love for Narcissa had inspired. 

On Celia playing on the harpsichord and
singing.

I.
When Sapho struck the quiv'ring wire,
The throbbing breast was all on fire:
And when she rais'd the vocal lay,
The captive soul was charm'd away!

II.
But had the nymph, possess'd with these
Thy softer, chaster pow'r to please;
Thy beauteous air of sprightly youth,
Thy native smiles of artless truth;

III.
The worm of grief, had never prey'd
On the forsaken, love-sick maid:
Nor had she mourn'd an happless flame,
Nor dash'd on rocks her tender frame.
My mistress paid me a cold compliment on
the versification, which, she said, was elegant enough,
but the subject beneath the pen of a true
poet. I was extremely nettled at her indifference,
and looked at Narcissas, who by this time had
joined us, for her approbation, but she declined
giving her opinion, protesting she was no judge of
these matters: So that I was forced to retire, 

very much baulked in my expectation, which
was generally a little too sanguine. —In the afternoon,
however, the waiting-maid assured me,
that Narcissa had expressed her approbation of my
performance with great warmth, and desired her
to procure a copy of it, as for herself, that she
(Narcissa) might have an opportunity to peruse it
at leisure. —I was elated to an extravagant pitch
at this intelligence, and immediately transcribed
a fair copy of my Ode, which was carried to the
dear charmer, together with another on the same
subject, as follows: 


I.
Thy fatal shafts unerring move,
I bow before thine altar, love!
I feel then soft, resistless flame
Glide swift through all my vital frame!

II.
For while I gaze my bosom glows,
My blood in tides impetuous flows,
Hope, fear and joy alternate roll,
And floods of transports 'whelm my soul!

III.
My fault'ring tongue attempts in vain
In soothing murmurs to complain,
My tongue some secret magick ties,
My murmurs sink in broken sighs!

IV.
Condemn'd to nurse eternal care,
And ever drop the silent tear,
Unheard I mourn, unknown I sigh,
Unfriended live, unpitied die!

Whether or not Narcissa discovered my passion,
I could not learn from her behaviour, which,
though always benevolent to me, was henceforth
more reserved and less chearful. —While my
thoughts aspired to a sphere so far above me, I
had unwittingly made a conquest of the cook-wench
and dairy-maid, who became so jealous of
one another, that if their sentiments had been
refined by education, it is probable one or other
of them would have had recourse to poison or
steel, to be revenged of her rival; but as their
minds were happily adapted to their humble station,
their mutual enmity was confined to scolding
and fisty-cuffs, in which exercises they were
both well skilled. —My good fortune did not long
remain a secret; being disclosed by the frequent
broils of these heroines, who kept no decorum in
their encounters. The coachman and gardiner,
who paid their devoirs to my admirers, each to
his respective choice, alarmed at my success, laid
their heads together, in order to concert a plan
of revenge; and the former having been educated
at the academy of Tottenham-court, undertook
to challenge me to single combat; he accordingly,
with many opprobrious invectives, bid
me defiance, and offered to box with me for
twenty guineas. —I told him, that although I believed
myself a match for him, even at that
work, I would not descend so far below the
dignity of a gentleman, as to fight like a porter; 
but if he had any thing to say to me, I was his
man at blunderbuss, musket, pistol, sword,
hatchet, spit, cleaver, fork or needle;—nay
more, that if he gave his tongue any more saucy
liberties at my expence, I would crop his ears
without any ceremony. —This rhodomontade delivered 

with a stern countenance, and resolute
tone, had the desired effect upon my antagonist,
who, with some confusion, sneaked off, and gave
his friend an account of his reception. —The story
taking air among the servants, procured for me
the title of Gentleman John, with which I was
sometimes honoured, even by my mistress and
Narcissa, who had been informed of the whole affair
by the chamber-maid. —In the mean time,
the rival queens expressed their passion by all the
ways in their power: The cook entertained me
with choice bits, the dairy-maid with stroakings; 
the first would often encourage me to declare myself,
by complimenting me upon my courage
and learning, and observing, that if she had a
husband like me, to maintain order and keep accounts,
she could make a great deal of money
by setting up an eating-house at London, for
gentlemen's servants on board-wages. —The other
courted my affection, by shewing her own importance,
and telling me, that many a substantial
farmer in the neighbourhood would be glad to
marry her; but she was resolved to please her
eye, if she should plague her heart. —Then she
would launch out into the praise of my proper
person, and say, she was sure I would make a
good husband, for I was very good-natured. —I
began to be uneasy at the importunities of these
inamoratas, whom at another time, perhaps, I
might have pleased without the disagreeable sauce
of matrimony; but at present, my whole soul
was engrossed by Narcissa, and I could not bear
the thoughts of doing any thing derogatory of
the passion I entertained for her. 