


Peregrine delivers his letters of recommendation at
London, and returns to the garison, to the unspeakable
joy of the commodore and his whole
family. 
Now that our hero found himself on English
ground, his heart dilated with the
proud recollection of his own improvement since
he left his native soil; he began to recognize
the interesting ideas of his tender years; he enjoyed,
by anticipation, the pleasure of seeing
his friends in the garison, after an absence of
eighteen months; and the image of his charming
Emily, which other lets worthy considerations
had depressed, resumed the full possession of his
breast. He remembered, with shame, that he
had neglected the correspondence with her brother,
which he himself had sollicited, and in consequence
of which he had received a letter from
that young gentleman while he lived at Paris. In
spite of these conscientious reflections, he was
too self-sufficient to think he should find any difficulty
in obtaining forgives for these sins of
omission; and began to imagine, that his passion
would be prejudicial to the dignity of his situation,
if it could not be gratified upon terms which
formerly his imagination durst not conceive. 
Sorry am I, that the talk I have undertaken,
lays me under the necessity of divulging this degeneracy
in the sentiments of our imperious
youth, who was now in the heyday of his blood,
flushed with the consciousness of his own qualifications,
vain of his fortune, and elated on the 

wings of imaginary expectation. Tho' he was
deeply enamoured of miss Gauntlet, he was far
from proposing her heart as the ultimate aim of
his gallantry, which (he did not doubt) would
triumph o'er the most illustrious females of the
land, and at once regale his appetite and ambition. 
Mean while, being willing to make his appearance
at the garison equally surprising and
agreeable, he cautioned Mr. Joker against writing
to the commodore, who had not heard of
them since their departure from Paris, and hired a
post-chaise and horses for London. The governor
going out to give orders about the carriage,
inadvertently left a paper book open upon the
table; and his pupil casting his eyes upon the
page, chanced to read these words: “Sept. 15.
Arrived in safety, by the blessing of God, in this
unhappy kingdom of England. And thus concludes
the journal of my last peregrination.” Peregrine's
curiosity being inflamed by this extraordinary
conclusion, he turned to the beginning,
and perused several sheets of a diary, such as is
commonly kept by that class of people known by
the denomination of travelling governors, for the
satisfaction of themselves and the parents or guardians
of their pupils, and for the edification and
entertainment of their friends. 
That the reader may have a clear idea of Mr.
Jolter's performance, we shall transcribe the
transactions of one day, as he had recorded them; 
and that abstract will be a sufficient specimen of
the whole plan and execution of the work. 
“May 3. At eight o'clock set out from Boulogne
in a post-chaise: the morning hazy and
cold. Fortified my stomach with a cordial. Recommended 

ditto to Mr. P. as an antidote against
the fog. Mem. He refused it. The hither horse
greased in the off-pastern of the hind-leg. Arrive
at Samers. Mem. This last was a post and a
half; i. e. three leagues, or nine English miles. 
The day clears up. A fine champain country,
well stored with corn. The postilion says his
prayers in passing by a wooden crucifix upon the
road. Mem. The horses staled in a small brook
that runs in a bottom, betwixt two hills. Arrive
at Cormont. A common post. A dispute with
my pupil, who is obstinate, and swayed by an unlucky
prejudice. Proceed to Montreuil, where
we dine on choice pigeons. A very moderate
charge. No chamberpot in the room; owing to
the negligence of the maid. This an ordinary
post. Set out again for Nampont. Troubled
with flatulencies and indigestion. Mr. P. is sullen,
and seems to mistake an eructation for the
breaking of wind backwards. From Nampont
depart for Bernay, at which place we arrive in
the evening, and propose to stay all night. N. B. 
The two last are double posts, and our cattle
very willing, tho' not strong. Sup on a delicate
ragout and excellent partridges, in company
with Mr. H. and his spouse. Mem. The said H.
trod upon my corn by mistake. Discharge the
bill, which is not very reasonable. Dispute with
Mr. P. about giving money to the servant: he
insists upon my giving a twenty-four sol piece; 
which is too much by two thirds, in all conscience. 
N. B. She was a pert baggage, and did
not deserve a liard.” 
Our hero was so much disobliged with certain
circumstances of this amusing and instructing
journal, that, by way of punishing the author, 

he interlined these words betwixt two paragraphs,
in a manner that exactly resembled the tutor's
hand-writing; “Mem. Had the pleasure of
drinking myself into a sweet intoxication, by
toasting our lawful king, and his royal family,
among some worthy English fathers of the society
of Jesus.” 
Having taken this revenge, he set out for
London, where he waited upon those noblemen
to whom he had letters of recommendation from
Paris; and was not only graciously received, but
even loaded with caresses and proffers of service,
because they understood he was a young gentleman
of fortune, who, far from standing in need
of their countenance or assistance, would make
an useful and creditable addition to the number
of their adherents. He had the honour of dining
at their tables, in consequence of pressing invitations,
and of spending several evenings with the
ladies, to whom he was particularly agreeable,
on account of his person, address, and bleeding
freely at play. 
Being thus initiated in the beau monde, he
thought it was high time to pay his respects to his
generous benefactor the commodore; and accordingly
departed one morning, with his train,
for the garison, at which he arrived in safety the
same night. When he entered the gate, which
was opened by a new servant that did not know
him, he found his old friend Hatchway stalking
in the yard, with a night-cap on his head, and a
pipe in his mouth; and advancing to him, took
him by the hand, before he had any intimation of
his approach. The lieutenant, thus saluted by a
stranger, stared at him in silent astonishment,
till he recollected his features, which were no 

sooner known, than dashing the pipe upon the
pavement, he exclaimed, “Smite my cross-trees!
the'art welcome to port;” and hugg'd him in his
arms with great affection. He then, by a cordial
squeeze, expressed his satisfaction at seeing
his old ship-mate Tom, who applying his whistle
to his mouth, the whole castle ecchoed with his
performance. 
The servants hearing the well-known sound,
poured out in a tumult of joy; and understanding
that their young master was returned, raised
such a peal of acclamation, as astonished the commodore
and his lady, and inspired Julia with such
an interesting presage, that her heart began to
throb with violence; and running out in the hurry
and perturbation of her hope, she was so much
overwhelmed at sight of her brother, that she
actually fainted in his arms. But from this trance
she soon awaked; and Peregrine having testified
his pleasure and affection, went up stairs, and presented
himself before his godfather and aunt. 
Mrs. Trunnion rose, and received him with a
gracious embrace, blessing God for his happy return
from a land of impiety and vice, in which
she hoped his morals had not been corrupted, nor
his principles of religion altered or impaired. 
The old gentleman being confined to his chair,
was struck dumb with pleasure at his appearance; 
and having made divers ineffectual efforts to get
up, at length discharged a volley of curses against
his own limbs, and held out his hand to his godson,
who kiss'd it with great respect. 
After he had finished his apostrophe to the
gout, which was the daily and hourly subject of
his execrations, “Well, my lad, (said he) I
care not how soon I go to bottom, now I behold 

thee safe in harbour again: and yet, I tell a
damn'd lie: I would I could keep afloat, until I
should see a lusty boy of thy begetting. Odds
my timbers! I love thee so well, that I believe
thou art the spawn of my own body; though I
can give no account of thy being put upon the
stocks.” Then turning his eye upon Pipes, who
by this time had penetrated into his apartment,
and addressed him with the usual salutation of
“What cheer?” “Ahey! (cried he) are you
there, you herring-fac'd son of a sea-calf? What
a slippery trick you played your old commander! 
But, come, you dog, there's my fist; I forgive
you, for the love you bear to my godson. Go
man your tackle, and hoist a cask of strong
beer into the yard, knock out the bung, and put
a pump in it, for the use of all my servants and
neighbours: and d'ye hear, let the patereroes
be fired, and the garison illuminated, as rejoicings
for the safe arrival of your master. By the Lord!
if I had the use of these damn'd shambling
shanks, I would dance an hornpipe with the best
of you.” 
The next object of his attention was Mr. Jolter,
who was honoured with particular marks
of distinction, and the repeated promise of enjoying
the living in his gift, as an acknowledgment
of the care and discretion with which he
had superintended the education and morals of
our hero. The governor was so affected by the
generosity of his patron, that the tears ran down
his cheeks, while he expressed his gratitude, and
the infinite satisfaction he felt, in contemplating
the accomplishments of his pupil. 
Mean while, Pipes did not neglect the orders
he had received: the beer was produced, the 

gates were thrown open for the admission of all
comers, the whole house was lighted up, and the
patereroes discharged in repeated vollies. Such
phænomena could not fail to attract the notice of
the neighbourhood. The club at Tunley's were
astonished at the report of the guns, which produced
various conjectures among the members of
that sagacious society. The landlord observed,
that in all likelihood the commodore was visited
by hobgoblins, and ordered the guns to be fired
in token of distress, as he had acted twenty years
before, when he was annoyed by the same grievance. 
The exciseman, with a waggish sneer,
expressed his apprehension of Trunnion's death,
in consequence of which, the patereroes might
be discharged with an equivocal intent, either as
signals of his lady's sorrow or rejoicing. The
attorney signified a suspicion of Hatchway's being
married to Miss Pickle, and that the firing and
illumination were in honour of the nuptials:
upon which Gamaliel discovered some faint signs
of emotion, and taking the pipe from his mouth,
gave it as his opinion, that his sister was brought
to bed. 
While they were thus bewildered in the maze
of their own imaginations, a company of countrymen,
who sat drinking in the kitchen, and
whose legs were more ready than their invention,
sallied out to know the meaning of these exhibitions; 
and understanding that there was a butt
of strong beer abroach in the yard, to which
they were invited by the servants, saved themselves
the trouble and expence of returning to
spend the evening at the public house, and listed
themselves under the banner of Tom Pipes, who
presided as director of this festival. 

The news of Peregrine's return being communicated
to the parish, the parson and three or
four neighbouring gentlemen, who were well-wishers
to our hero, immediately repaired to the
garison, in order to pay their compliments on this
happy event; and being detained to supper, an
elegant entertainment was prepared by the direction
of Miss July, who was an excellent housewife; 
and the commodore was so invigorated
with joy, that he seemed to have renewed his
age. 
Among those who honoured the occasion with
his presence was Mr. Clover, the young gentleman
that made his addresses to Peregrine's sister; 
and his heart was so big with his passion, that
while the rest of the company were ingrossed by
their cups, he seized an opportunity of our hero's
being detached from the conversation, and in the
impatience of his love, conjured him to consent
to his happiness; protesting, that he would comply
with any terms of settlement that a man of
his fortune could embrace, in favour of a young
lady who was absolute mistress of his affection. 
Our youth thanked him very politely for his
favourable sentiments and honourable intention
towards his sister, and told him, that at present
he saw no reason to obstruct his desire; that he
would consult Julia's own inclinations, and confer
with him about the means of gratifying his
wish: but, in the mean time, begg'd to be excused
from discussing any point of such importance
to them both, and reminding him of the
jovial purpose on which they were happily met,
promoted such a quick circulation of the bottle,
that their mirth grew noisy and obstreperous:
they broke forth into repeated peals of laughter, 

without any previous incitement, except that of
claret. These explosions were succeeded by Bacchanalian
songs, in which the old gentleman himself
attempted to bear a share; the sedate governor
snapped time with his fingers, and the
parish-priest assisted in the chorus with a most
expressive nakedness of countenance. Before
midnight, they were almost all pinned to their
chairs, as if they had been fixed by the power
of inchantment; and what rendered the confinement
still more unfortunate, every servant in
the house was in the same situation; so that they
were fain to take their repose as they sat, and
nodded to each other like a congregation of anabaptists. 
Next day, Peregrine communed with his sister
on the subject of her match with Mr. Clover,
who (she told him) had offered to settle a jointure
of four hundred pounds, and take her to wife,
without any expectation of a dowry. She,
moreover, gave him to understand, that in his
absence she had received several messages from
her mother, commanding her to return to her father's
house; but that she had refused to obey
these orders, by the advice and injunction of her
aunt and the commodore, which were indeed seconded
by her own inclination; because she had
all the reason in the world to believe, that her
mother only wanted an opportunity of treating
her with severity and rancour: for the resentment
of that lady had been carried to such indecent
lengths, that seeing her daughter at church one
day, she rose up before the parson entered, and
reviled her with great bitterness, in the face of
the whole congregation. 