



The Author diverts the Emperor and his Nobility
of both Sexes, in a very uncommon Manner. 
The Diversions of the Court of Lilliput described. 
The Author hath his Liberty granted him upon
certain Conditions. 

My Gentleness and good Behaviour
had gained so far on the Emperor
and his Court, and indeed upon
the Army and People in general,
that I began to conceive Hopes of
getting my Liberty in a short Time. 
I took all possible Methods to cultivate this favourable
Disposition. The Natives came by Degrees
to be less apprehensive of any Danger from me. 
I would sometimes lie down, and let five or six of
them dance on my Hand. And at last the Boys
and Girls would venture to come and play at Hide
and Seek in my Hair. I had now made a good
Progress in understanding and speaking their Language. 
The Emperor had a mind one Day to entertain
me with several of the Country Shows; 
wherein they exceed all Nations I have known,
both for Dexterity and Magnificence. I was diverted 

with none so much as that of the Rope-Dancers,
performed upon a slender white Thread,
extended about two Foot, and twelve Inches from
the Ground. Upon which, I shall desire Liberty,
with the Reader's Patience, to enlarge a little. 
This diversion is only practised by those Persons, 
who are Candidates for great Employments,
and high Favour, at Court. They are trained in
this Art from their Youth, and are not always of 
noble Birth, or liberal Education. When a great
Office is vacant, either by Death or Disgrace,
(which often happens) five or six of those Candidates
petition the Emperor to entertain his Majesty
and the Court with a Dance on the Rope; and
whoever jumps the highest without falling, succeeds
in the Office. Very often the chief Ministers
themselves are commanded to shew their Skill,
and to convince the Emperor that they have not
lost their Faculty. Flimnap, the Treasurer, is allowed
to cut a Caper on the strait Rope, at least an
Inch higher than any other Lord in the whole Empire. 
I have seen him do the Summerset several
times together, upon a Trencher fixed on the Rope,
which is no thicker than a common Packthread in
England. My Friend Reldresal, principal Secretary
for private Affairs, is, in my Opinion, if I am
not partial, the second after the Treasurer; the
rest of the great Officers are much upon a Par. 
These diversions are often attended with fatal
Accidents, whereof great Numbers are on Record. 
I my self have seen two or three Candidates break
a Limb. But the Danger is much greater, when
the Ministers themselves are commanded to shew
their Dexterity: For, by contending to excel themselves 

and their Fellows, they strain so far, that
there is hardly one of them who hath not received
a Fall; and some of them two or three. I was
assured, that a Year or two before my Arrival,
Flimnap would have infallibly broke his Neck, if
one of the King's Cushions, that accidentally lay on
the Ground, had not weakened the Force of his 
Fall. 
There is likewise another Diversion, which is
only shewn before the Emperor and Empress, and
first Minister, upon particular Occasions. The
Emperor lays on a Table three fine silken Threads
of six Inches long. One is Blue, the other Red,
and the third Green. These Threads are proposed
as Prizes, for those Persons whom the Emperor hath
a mind to distinguish by a peculiar Mark of his
Favour. The Ceremony is performed in his Majesty's 
great Chamber of State; where the Candidates 
are to undergo a Tryal of Dexterity very different 
from the former; and such as I have not observed 
the least Resemblance of in any other Country
of the old or the new World. The Emperor
holds a Stick in his Hands, both Ends parallel to
the Horizon, while the Candidates advancing one
by one, sometimes leap over the Stick, sometimes
creep under it backwards and forwards several
times, according as the Stick is advanced or depressed. 
Sometimes the Emperor holds one End of
the Stick, and his first Minister the other; sometimes
the Minister has it entirely to himself. 
Whoever performs his Part with most Agility, and
holds out the longest in leaping and creeping, is
rewarded with the Blue-coloured Silk; the Red is 

given to the next, and the Green to the third
which they all wear girt twice round about the
Middle; and you see few great Persons about this
Court, who are not adorned with one of these
Girdles. 
The Horses of the Army, and those of the
Royal Stables, having been daily led before me,
were no longer shy, but would come up to my
very Feet, without starting. The Riders would
leap them over my Hand as I held it on the Ground; 
and one of the Emperor's Huntsmen, upon a large
Courser, took my Foot, Shoe and all; which was
indeed a prodigious Leap. I had the good Fortune
to divert the Emperor one Day, after a very extraordinary
Manner. I desired he would order several
Sticks of two Foot high, and the Thickness of
an ordinary Cane, to be brought me; whereupon
his Majesty commanded the Master of his Woods
to give Directions accordingly; and the next Morning
six Wood-men arrived with as many Carriages,
drawn by eight Horses to each. I took nine of
these Sticks, and fixing them firmly in the Ground
in a Quadrangular Figure, two Foot and a half
square; I took four other Sticks, and tyed them
parallel at each Corner, about two Foot from the
Ground; then I fastened my Handkerchief to the
nine Sticks that stood erect; and extended it on all
Sides, till it was as tight as the Top of a Drum; 
and the four parallel Sticks rising about five Inches
higher than the Handkerchief, served as Ledges on
each Side. When I had finished my Work, I desired
the Emperor to let a Troop of his best Horse,
Twenty-four in Number, come and exercise upon
this Plain. His Majesty approved of the Proposal, 

and I took them up one by one in my Hands, ready
mounted and armed, with the proper Officers to
exercise them. As soon as they got into Order,
they divided into two Parties, performed mock
Skirmishes, discharged blunt Arrows, drew their
Swords, fled and pursued, attacked and retired; 
and in short discovered the best military Discipline
I ever beheld. The parallel Sticks secured them
and their Horses from falling over the Stage; and
the Emperor was so much delighted, that he ordered
this Entertainment to be repeated several
Days; and once was pleased to be lifted up, and
give the Word of Command; and, with great Difficulty,
persuaded even the Empress her self to let
me hold her in her close Chair, within two Yards
of the Stage, from whence she was able to take a
full View of the whole Performance. It was my
good Fortune that no ill Accident happened in these
Entertainments; only once a fiery Horse that belonged 
to one of the Captains, pawing with his
Hoof struck a Hole in my Handkerchief, and his
Foot slipping, he overthrew his Rider and himself; 
but I immediately relieved them both: For covering
the Hole with one Hand, I set down the
Troop with the other, in the same Manner as I
took them up. The Horse that fell was strained in
the left Shoulder, but the Rider got no Hurt; and
I repaired my Handkerchief as well as I could:
However, I would not trust to the Strength of it
any more in such dangerous Enterprizes. 
About two or three Days before I was set at
Liberty, as I was entertaining the Court with these
Kinds of Feats, there arrived an Express to inform
his Majesty, that some of his Subjects riding near 

the Place where I was first taken up, had seen a
great black Substance lying on the Ground, very
oddly shaped, extending its Edges round as wide as
his Majesty's Bedchamber, and rising up in the Middle
as high as a Man: That it was no living Creature,
as they at first apprehended; for it lay on the
Grass without Motion, and some of them had
walked round it several Times: That by mounting
upon each others Shoulders, they had got to the
Top, which was flat and even; and, stamping
upon it, they found it was hollow within: That
they humbly conceived it might be something belonging
to the Man-Mountain; and if his Majesty
pleased, they would undertake to bring it with only
five Horses. I presently knew what they meant; 
and was glad at Heart to receive this Intelligence. 
It seems, upon my first reaching the Shore, after
our Shipwreck, I was in such Confusion, that before
I came to the Place where I went to sleep,
my Hat, which I had fastened with a String to my
Head while I was rowing, and had stuck on all the
Time I was swimming, fell off after I came to
Land; the String, as I conjecture, breaking by
some Accident which I never observed, but thought
my Hat had been lost at Sea. I intreated his lmperial 
Majesty to give Orders it might be brought to
me as soon as possible, describing to him the Use
and the Nature of it: And the next Day the Waggoners 
arrived with it, but not in a very good Condition; 
they had bored two Holes in the Brim,
within an Inch and a half of the Edge, and fastened
two Hooks in the Holes; these Hooks were tied by
a long Cord to the Harness, and thus my Hat was
dragged along for above half an English Mile: But 

the Ground in that Country being extremely
smooth and level, it received less Damage than I
expected. 
Two Days after this Adventure, the Emperor
having ordered that Part of his Army, which quarters
in and about his Metropolis, to be in a Readiness,
took a fancy of diverting himself in a very
singular Manner. He desired I would stand like a
Colossus, with my Legs as far asunder as I conveniently
could. He then commanded his General
(who was an old experienced Leader, and a great
Patron of mine) to draw up the Troops in close
Order, and march them under me; the Foot by
Twenty-four in a Breast, and the Horse by Sixteen,
with Drums beating, Colours flying, and Pikes advanced. 
This Body consisted of three Thousand
Foot, and a Thousand Horse. His Majesty gave
Orders, upon Pain of Death, that every Soldier in
his March should observe the strictest Decency,
with regard to my Person; which, however, could
not prevent some of the younger Officers from
turning up their Eyes as they passed under me. 
And, to confess the Truth, my Breeches were at
that Time in so ill a Condition, that they afforded
some Opportunities for Laughter and Admiration. 
I had sent so many Memorials and Petitions for
my Liberty, that his Majesty at length mentioned
the Matter first in the Cabinet, and then in a full
Council; where it was opposed by none, except
Skyresh Bolgolam, who was pleased, without any
Provocation, to be my mortal Enemy. But it was
carried against him by the whole Board, and confirmed 

by the Emperor. That Minister was Galbet,
or Admiral of the Realm; very much in his 
Master's Confidence, and a Person well versed in
Affairs, but of a morose and sour Complection. 
However, he was at length persuaded to comply; 
but prevailed that the Articles and Conditions upon
which I should be set free, and to which I must
swear, should be drawn up by himself. These Articles
were brought to me by Skyresh Bolgolam in
Person, attended by two under Secretaries, and several 
Persons of Distinction. After they were read,
I was demanded to swear to the Performance of
them; first in the Manner of my own Country,
and afterwards in the Method prescribed by their
Laws; which was to hold my right Foot in my
left Hand, to place the middle Finger of my right-Hand
on the Crown of my Head, and my Thumb
on the Tip of my right Ear. But, because the
Reader may perhaps be curious to have some Idea
of the Style and Manner of Expression peculiar to
that People, as well as to know the Articles upon
which I recovered my Liberty; I have made a
Translation of the whole Instrument, Word for
Word, as near as I was able; which I here offer to
the Publick. 
Golbasto Momaren Evlame Gurdilo
Shefin Mully Ully Gue, most Mighty Emperor
of Lilliput, Delight and Terror of the Universe,
whose Dominions extend five Thousand
Blustrugs, (about twelve Miles in Circumference)
to the Extremities of the Globe: Monarch of all
Monarchs: Taller than the Sons of Men; whose
Feet press down to the Center, and whose Head 

strikes against the Sun: At whose Nod the Princes
of the Earth shake their Knees; pleasant as the
Spring, comfortable as the Summer, fruitful as Autumn,
dreadful as Winter. His most sublime Majesty
proposeth to the Man-Mountain, lately arrived
at our Celestial Dominions, the following Articles,
which by a solemn Oath he shall be obliged
to perform. 
First, The Man-Mountain shall not depart
from our Dominions, without our Licence under
our Great Seal. 
Secondly, He shall not presume to come into
our Metropolis, without our express Order; at
which time, the Inhabitants shall have two Hours
Warning, to keep within their Doors. 
Thirdly, The said Man-Mountain shall confine
his Walks to our principal high Roads; and
not offer to walk or lie down in a Meadow, or
Field of Corn. 
Fourthly, As he walks the said Roads, he
shall take the utmost Care not to trample upon the
Bodies of any of our loving Subjects, their Horses,
or Carriages; nor take any of our said Subjects into
his Hands, without their own Consent. 
Fifthly, If an Express require extraordinary
Dispatch; the Man-Mountain shall be obliged to
carry in his Pocket the Messenger and Horse, a six
Days Journey once in every Moon, and return the 

said Messenger back (if so required) safe to our
Imperial Presence. 
Sixthly, He shall be our Ally against our Enemies
in the Island of Blefuscu, and do his utmost
to destroy their Fleet, which is now preparing to
invade Us. 
Seventhly, That the said Man-Mountain
shall, at his Times of Leisure, be aiding and assisting
to our Workmen, in helping to raise certain
great Stones, towards covering the Wall of the
principal Park, and other our Royal Buildings. 
Elghthly, That the said Man-Mountain shall,
in two Moons Time, deliver in an exact Survey
of the Circumference of our Dominions, by a
Computation of his own Paces round the Coast. 
Lastly, That upon his solemn Oath to observe
all the above Articles, the said Man-Mountain
shall have a daily Allowance of Meat and
Drink, sufficient for the Support of 1724 of our
Subjects; with free Access to our Royal Person,
and other Marks of our Favour. Given at our
Palace at Belfaborac the Twelfth Day of the
Ninety-first Moon of our Reign. 
I swore and subscribed to these Articles with
great Chearfulness and Content, although some of
them were not so honourable as I could have
wished; which proceeded wholly from the Malice
of Skyresh Bolgolam the High Admiral:
Whereupon my Chains were immediately unlocked, 

and I was at full Liberty: The Emperor
himself, in Person, did me the Honour to be by at
the whole Ceremony. I made my Acknowledgments,
by prostrating myself at his Majesty's Feet:
But he commanded me to rise; and after many
gracious Expressions, which, to avoid the Censure
of Vanity, I shall not repeat; he added, that he
hoped I should prove a useful Servant, and well deserve 
all the Favours he had already conferred upon
me, or might do for the future. 
The Reader may please to observe, that in the
last Article for the Recovery of my Liberty, the
Emperor stipulates to allow me a Quantity of Meat
and Drink, sufficient for the Support of 1724 Lilliputians. 
Some time after, asking a Friend at Court
how they came to fix on that determinate Number; 
he told me, that his Majesty's Mathematicians,
having taken the Height of my Body by the
Help of a Quadrant, and finding it to exceed theirs
in the Proportion of Twelve to One, they concluded
from the Similarity of their Bodies, that mine
must contain at least 1724 of theirs, and consequently
would require as much Food as was necessary
to support that Number of Lilliputians. By
which, the Reader may conceive an Idea of the
Ingenuity of that People, as well as the prudent and
exact Oeconomy of so great a Prince. 
