

The terms on which she had been admitted into this house,
included the advance of one quarter's rent and the monthly
payment of subsequent dues. The requisite sum had been
with difficulty collected, the landlord had twice called to
remind her of her stipulation, and this day had been fixed
for the discharge of this debt. He had omitted, contrary
to her expectations and her wishes, to come. It was probable,
however, that they should meet on the ensuing day. If
he should fail in this respect, it appeared to be her duty to
carry the money to his house, and this it had been her resolution
to perform.
Now, however, new views were suggested to her thoughts.
By the payment of this debt she should leave herself nearly
destitute. The flight and terror of the citizens would deprive
her of employment. Want of food was an immediate
and inevitable evil which the payment of this sum would
produce. Was it just to incur this evil? To retain the
means of luxurious gratification would be wrong, but to bereave
herself and her father of bare subsistence was surely
no dictate of duty.
It is true the penalty of nonpayment was always in the
landlord's hands. He was empowered by the law to sell their
moveables and expel them from his house. It was now no
time for a penalty like this to be incurred. But from this
treatment it was reasonable to hope that his lenity would
save them. Was it not right to wait till the alternative of
expulsion or payment was imposed? Meanwhile, however,
she was subjected to the torments of suspense and to the
guilt of a broken promise. These consequences were to
be cluded only in one way. By visiting her landlord and
stating her true condition, it was possible that his compassion
would remit claims which were, in themselves, unreasonable
and uncommon. The tender of the money accompanied




by representations sufficiently earnest and pathetic, might
possibly be declined.
These reflections were, next morning, submitted to her
father. Her decision in this case was of less importance in
his eyes, than in those of his daughter. Should the money
be retained, it was, in his opinion, a pittance too small to
afford them effectual support. Supposing provisions to be
had at any price, which was, itself improbable, that price
would be exorbitant. The general confusion would probably
last for months, and thirty dollars would be devoured in a
few weeks even in a time of safety. To give or to keep
was indifferent for another reason. It was absurd for those
to consult about means of subsistence for the next month,
when it was fixed that they should die tomorrow.—The
true proceeding was obvious. The landlord's character was
well known to him by means of the plaints and invectives of
their neighbors, most of whom were tenants of the same
man. If the money were offered, his avarice would receive
it, in spite of all the pleas that she should urge. If it were
detained without lieve, an officer of justice would quickly
be despatched to claim it.
This statement was sufficient to take away from Constantia
the hope that she had fostered. What then, said
she, after a pause, is my father's advice? Shall I go forthwith
and deliver the money?
No, said he, stay till he sends for it. Have you forgotten
that Mathews resides in the very midst of this disease.
There is no need to thrust yourself within its fangs. They
will reach us time enough. It is likely his messenger will
be an agent of the law. No matter. The debt will be
merely increased by a few charges. In a state like ours,
the miserable remnant is not worth caring for.
This reasoning, did not impart conviction to the lady.
The danger, flowing from a tainted atmosphere was not
small, but to incur that danger was wiser than to exasperate
their landlord, to augment the debt and to encounter the
disgrace, accruing from a constable's visits. The conversation
was dropped, and, presently after, she set out on a visit
to Mathews.
She fully estimated the importance to her happiness of
the sum which she was going to pay. The general panic




had already, in some degree, produced the effect she chiefly
dreaded; the failure of employment for her needle. Her
father had, with his usual diligence at self-torment, supplied
her with sufficient proofs of the covetous and obdurate temper
of her creditor. Insupportable, however, as the evil of
payment was, it was better to incur it spontaneously, than
by means of legal process. The desperateness of this proceeding
therefore, did not prevent her from adopting it, but
it filled her heart with the bitterest sensations. Absorbed
as she past along, by these, she was nearly insensible to the
vacancy which now prevailed in a quarter which formerly
resounded with the din of voices and carriages.
As she approached the house to which she was going, her
reluctance to proceed increased. Frequently she paused
to recollect the motives that had prescribed this task, and to
reinforce her purposes. At length she arrived at the house.
Now, for the first time, her attention was excited by the
silence and desolation that surrounded her. This evidence
of fear and of danger struck upon her heart. All appeared
to have fled from the presence of this unseen and terrible
foe. The temerity of adventuring thus into the jaws of the
pest, now appeared to her in glaring colors.
Appearances suggested a reflection which had not previously
occurred, and which tended to console her. Was it
not probable that Mathews had likewise flown? His habits
were calculated to endear to him his life; he would scarcely
be among the last to shun perils like these; the omission
of his promised visit on the preceding day, might be owing
to his absence from the city, and thus, without subjection to
any painful alternative, she might be suffered to retain the
money.
To give certainty to this hope, she cast her eye towards
the house opposite to which she now stood. Her heart
drooped on perceiving proofs that the dwelling was still inhabited.
The door was open and the windows in the second
and third story were raised. Near the entrance, in the street,
stood a cart. The horse attached to it, in his form and
furniture and attitude, was an emblem of torpor and decay.
His gaunt sides, motionless limbs, his gummy and dead
eyes, and his head hanging to the ground, were in unison
with the craziness of the vehicle to which he belonged, and





the paltry and bedusted harness which covered him. No
attendant nor any human face was visible. The stillness,
though at an hour customarily busy, was uninterrupted except
by the sound of wheels moving at an almost indistinguishable
distance.
She paused for a moment to contemplate this unwonted
spectacle. Her trepidations were mingled with emotions
not unakin to sublimity, but the consciousness of danger
speedily prevailed, and she hastened to acquit herself of her
engagement. She approached the door for this purpose,
but before she could draw the bell her motions were arrested
by sounds from within. The staircase was opposite the
door. Two persons were now discovered descending the
stair. They lifted between them a heavy mass, which was
presently discerned to be a coffin. Shocked by this discovery
and trembling she withdrew from the entrance.
At this moment a door on the opposite side of the street
opened and a female came out. Constantia approached
her involuntarily and her appearance not being unattractive,
adventured, more by gestures than by words, to inquire
whose obsequies were thus unceremoniously conducted.
The woman informed her that the dead was Mathews, who,
two days before, was walking about, indifferent to, and
braving danger. She cut short the narrative which her
companion seemed willing to prolong, and to embellish with
all its circumstances, and hastened home with her utmost
expedition.
The mind of Constantia was a stranger to pusillanimity.
Death, as the common lot of all, was regarded by her without
perturbation. The value of life, though not annihilated,
was certainly diminished by adversity. With whatever
solemnity contemplated, it excited on her own account, no
aversion or inquietude. For her father's sake only, death
was an evil to be ardently deprecated. The nature of the
prevalent disease, the limits and modes of its influence, the
risk that is incurred by approaching the sick or the dead, or
by breathing the surrounding element, were subjects foreign
to her education. She judged like the mass of mankind
from the most obvious appearances, and was subject like
them to impulses, which disdained the control of her reason.




With all her complacency for death and speculative resignation
to the fate that governs the world, disquiet and alarm
pervaded her bosom on this occasion.
The deplorable state to which her father would be reduced
by her death, was seen and lamented, but her tremulous
sensations flowed not from this source. They were, in
some sort, inexplicable and mechanical. In spite of recollection
and reflection, they bewildered and harassed her,
and subsided only of their own accord.
The death of Mathews was productive of one desirable
consequence. Till the present tumult were passed, and his
representatives had leisure to inspect his affairs, his debtors
would probably remain unmolested. He, likewise, who
should succeed to the inheritance, might possess very
different qualities, and be as much distinguished for equity
as Mathews had been for extortion. These reflections
lightened her footsteps as she hied homeward. The knowledge
she had gained, she hoped would counterpoise, in her
father's apprehension, the perils, which accompanied the
acquisition of it.
She had scarcely passed her own threshold, when she
was followed by Whiston. This man pursued the occupation
of a cooper. He performed journeywork in a shop,
which, unfortunately for him, was situated near the water,
and at a small distance from the scene of original infection.
This day his employer had dismissed his workmen, and
Whiston was at liberty to retire from the city; a scheme,
which had been the theme of deliberation and discussion
during the preceding fortnight.
Hitherto his apprehensions seemed to have molested
others more than himself. The rumors and conjectures industriously
collected during the day, were, in the evening,
copiously detailed to his neighbors, and his own mind
appeared to he disburthened of its cares, in proportion as
he filled others with terror and inquietude. The predictions
of physicians, the measures of precaution prescribed by the
government, the progress of the malady, and the history of
the victims who were hourly destroyed by it, were communicated
with tormenting prolixity and terrifying minuteness.
On these accounts as well as on others, no one's visits
were more unwelcome than his. As his deportment was




sober and honest, and his intentions harmless, he was always
treated, by Constantia, with politeness, though his entrance
always produced a momentary depression of her spirits.
On this evening she was less fitted than ever to repel those
anxieties which his conversation was qualified to produce.
His entrance, therefore, was observed with sincere regret.
Contrary, however, to her expectation, Whiston brought
with him new manners and a new expression of countenance.
He was silent, abstracted, his eye was full of inquietude,
and wandered with perpetual restlessness. On these tokens
being remarked, he expressed, in faultering accents his belief,
that he had contracted this disease, and that now it was
too late for him to leave the city.
Mr. Dudley's education was somewhat medical. He
was so far interested in his guest as to inquire into his sensations.
They were such as were commonly the preludes to
fever. Mr. Dudley, while he endeavored by cheerful tones,
to banish his dejection, exhorted him to go home, and to
take some hot and wholesome draught, in consequence of
which, he might rise tomorrow with his usual health. This
advice was gratefully received, and Whiston put a period to
his visit much sooner than was customary.
Mr. Dudley entertained no doubts that Whiston was seized
with the reigning disease, and extinguished the faint hope
which his daughter had cherished, that their district would
escape. Whiston's habitation was nearly opposite their
own, but as they made no use of their front room, they had
seldom an opportunity of observing the transactions of their
neighbors. This distance and seclusion were congenial
with her feelings, and she derived pleasure from her father's
confession, that they contributed to personal security.
Constantia was accustomed to rise with the dawn, and
traverse, for an hour, the State house Mall. As she took
her walk the next morning, she pondered with astonishment
on the present situation of the city. The air was bright
and pure, and apparently salubrious. Security and silence
seemed to hover over the scene. She was only reminded
of the true state of things by the occasional appearance of
carriages loaded with household utensils tending towards the
country, and by the odour of vinegar by which every passenger
was accompanied. The public walk was cool and




fragrant as formerly, skirted by verdure as bright, and shaded by
foliage as luxuriant, but it was no longer frequented by lively
steps and cheerful countenances. Its solitude was uninterrupted
by any but herself.
This day passed without furnishing any occasion to leave
the house. She was less sedulously employed than usual, as
the clothes, on which she was engaged, belonged to a family
who had precipitately left the city. She had leisure therefore
to ruminate. She could not but feel some concern in
the fate of Whiston. He was a young man who subsisted
on the fruits of his labor, and divided his gains with an only
sister who lived with him, and who performed every house-hold
office.
This girl was humble and innocent, and of a temper
affectionate and mild. Casual intercourse only had taken
place between her and Constantia. They were too dissimilar
for any pleasure to arise from communication, but the
latter was sufficiently disposed to extend to her harmless
neighbor, the sympathy and succor which she needed.
Whiston had come from a distant part of the country, and
his sister was the only person in the city with whom he was
connected by ties of kindred. In case of his sickness, therefore,
their condition would be helpless and deplorable.
Evening arrived, and Whiston failed to pay his customary
visit. She mentioned this omission to her father, and expressed
her apprehension as to the cause of it. He did not
discountenance the inference which she drew from this circumstance,
and assented to the justice of the picture which
she drew of the calamitous state to which Whiston and his
sister would be reduced by the indisposition of either. She
then ventured to suggest the propriety of visiting the house,
and of thus ascertaining the truth.
To this proposal Mr. Dudley urged the most vehement
objections. What purpose could be served by entering their
dwelling? What benefit would flow but the gratification of
a dangerous curiosity? Constantia was disabled from furnishing
pecuniary aid. She could not act the part of physician
or nurse. Her father stood in need of a thousand
personal services, and the drudgery of cleansing and cooking,
already exceeded the bounds of her strength. The
hazard of contracting the disease by conversing with the





sick, was imminent. What services was she able to render
equivalent to the consequences of her own sickness and
death?
These representations had temporary influence. They
recalled her for a moment, from her purpose, but this purpose
was speedily re-embraced. She reflected that the
evil to herself, formidable as it was, was barely problematical.
That converse with the sick would impart this disease,
was by no means certain. Whiston might at least be visited.
Perhaps she should find him well. If sick, his disease might
be unepidemical, or curable by seasonable assistance. He
might stand in need of a physician, and she was more able
than his sister, to summon this aid.
Her father listened calmly to her reasonings. After a
pause, he gave his consent. In doing this he was influenced
not by the conviction that his daughter's safety would be
exposed to no hazard, but from a belief that though she
might shun infection for the present, it would inevitably seize
her during some period of the progress of this pest.
