


Wherein our Hero proceeds in the
Road to Greatness. 
But we must not detain our Reader
too long with those low Stories. He
is doubtless as impatient as the Audience
at the Theatre, till the principal Figure returns
on the Stage; we will therefore indulge
his Inclination, and pursue the Actions
of the great Wild. 
There happened to be in the Stage-Coach,
in which Mr. Wild travelled from
Dover, a certain young Gentleman who
had sold an Estate in Kent, and was going
to London to receive the Money. There
was likewise a handsome young Woman
who had left her Parents at Canterbury, and
was proceeding to the same City, in order
(as she informed her Fellow Travellers) to
make her Fortune. With this Girl the 

young Spark was so much enamoured, that
he publickly acquainted her with the Purpose
of his Journey, and offered her a considerable
Sum in Hand and a Settlement, if
she would consent to return with him into
the Country, where she would be at a
safe Distance from her Relations. Whether
she accepted this Proposal or no,
we are not able with any tolerable
Certainty to deliver: But Wild, the
Moment he heard of this Money, began
to cast about in his Mind by what Means
he might become Master of it. He entred
into a long Harangue about the Methods of
carrying Money safely on the Road, and
said, he had at that Time two Bank Bills
of a hundred Pounds each sowed in his
Stock; which, added he, is so safe a Way,
that if I met never so many Highwaymen
it is almost impossible I should be in any
Danger of being robbed. 
The Gentleman, who was no Descendant
of Solomon's, greatly approved Wild's
Ingenuity, and thanking him for his Information,
declared he would follow his Example
when he returned into the Country: 

By which Means he proposed to save the
Premium commonly taken for the Remittance. 
Wild had then no more to do but
to inform himself rightly of the Time of
the Gentleman's Journey, which he did
with great Certainty, before they separated. 
At his Arrival in Town, he fixed on
two whom he regarded as the most resolute
of his Gang for this Enterprize; and
accordingly having summoned the principal
or most desperate, as he imagined
him of these two (for he never chose to
communicate within the Presence of more
than one) he proposed to him the robbing
and murthering this Gentleman. 
Mr. Marybone (for that was the Gentleman's
Name to whom he applied) readily
agreed to the Robbery; but he hesitated
at the Murther. He said, as to Robbery,
he had, on much weighing and considering
the Matter, very well reconciled
his Conscience to it; for tho' that noble
Kind of Robbery which was executed on
the Highway, was from the Cowardice of 

Mankind less frequent, yet the baser and
meaner Species sometimes called Cheating,
but more commonly known by the Name
of Robbery within the Law, was in a Manner
universal. He did not therefore pretend
to the Reputation of being so much honester
than other People; but could by no Means
satisfy himself in the Commission of Murther,
which was a Sin of the most heinous
Nature, and so immediately prosecuted by
God's Judgment, that it never passed undiscovered
or unpunished. 
Wild, with the utmost Disdain in his
Countenance, answered as follows. “Art
thou he whom I have selected out of my
whole Gang for this glorious Undertaking,
and dost thou cant of God's Revenge
against Murther. You have, it
seems, reconciled your Conscience (a
pretty Word) to Robbery from its being
so common. Is it then the Novelty
of Murther which deters you? Do you
imagine that Guns, and Pistols, and
Swords, and Knives, are the only Instruments
of Death? Look into the World
and see the Numbers whom broken Fortunes 

and broken Hearts, bring untimely
to the Grave. To omit those glorious
Heroes, who, to their immortal Honour,
have massacred whole Nations,
what think you of private Persecution,
Treachery, and Slander, by which the
very Souls of Men are in a Manner torn
from their Bodies? Is it not more generous,
nay, more Good-natured to send
a Man to his rest; than after having plundered
him of all he hath, or from Malice
or Malevolence deprived him of his
Character, to punish him with a languishing
Death, or what is worse, a languishing
Life? Murther, therefore, is
not so uncommon as you weakly conceive
it, tho', as you said of Robbery,
that more noble Kind, which lies within
the Paw of the Law, may be so. But this
is the most innocent in him who doth
it, and the most eligible to him who is
to suffer it. Believe me, Lad, the Tongue
of a Viper is less hurtful than that of a
Slanderer, and the gilded Scales of a
Rattle-Snake less dreadful than the Purse of
the Oppressor. Let me therefore hear no
more of your Scruples; but consent to 

my Proposal without further Hesitation,
unless like a Woman you are afraid of
blooding your Cloaths, or like a Fool
are terrified with the Apprehensions of
being hanged in Chains. Take my Word
for it, you had better be an honest Man
than half a Rogue. Do not think of continuing
in my Gang without abandoning
yourself absolutely to my Pleasure; for no
Man shall ever receive a Favour at my
Hands, who sticks at any thing, or is
guided by any other Law than that of
my Will.” 
Wild thus ended his Speech, which had
not the desired Effect on Marybone: He agreed
to the Robbery, but would not undertake
the Murther, as Wild (who feared that
by Marybone's demanding to search the
Gentleman's Neck, he might hazard Suspicion
himself) insisted. Marybone was
immediately entered by Wild in his Black-Book,
and was presently after impeached
and executed, as a Fellow on whom his
Leader could not place sufficient Dependence. 