


A Dialogue between young Master
Wild and Count La Ruse, which,
having extended to the Rejoinder,
had a very quiet, easy, and natural
Conclusion. 
One Evening after the Miss Snaps
were retired to Rest, the Count
thus addressed himself to young Wild: 
“You cannot, I apprehend, Mr. Wild, be
such a Stranger to your own great Capacity,
as to be surprized when I tell
you, I have often viewed, with a Mixture
of Astonishment and Concern, your
shining Qualities confined to a Sphere,
where they can never reach the Eyes of
those who would introduce them properly
into the World, and raise you to an
Eminence, where you may blaze out
to the Admiration of all Men. I assure
you I am pleased with my Captivity,
when I reflect, I am likely to owe to it
an Acquaintance, and I hope Friendship, 

with the greatest Genius of my Age; 
and, what is still more, when I indulge
my Vanity with a Prospect of drawing
from Obscurity (pardon the Expression)
such Talents as were, I believe, never
before like to have been buried in it; for
I make no Question, but, at my Discharge
from Confinement, which will
now soon happen, I shall be able to introduce
you into Company, where you
may reap the Advantage of your superior
Parts. 
“I will bring you acquainted, Sir, with
those, who, as they are capable of setting
a true Value on such Qualifications,
so they will have it both in their Power
and Inclination to prefer you for them. 
Such an Introduction is the only Advantage
you want, without which your Merit
might be your Misfortune; for those
Abilities which would entitle you to Honour
and Profit in a superior Station,
may render you only obnoxious to Danger
and Disgrace in a lower.” 

Mr. Wild answered: “Sir, I am not insensible
of my Obligations to you, as
well for the overvalue you have set on
my small Abilities, as the Kindness you
express in offering to introduce me among
my Superiours. I must own, my
Father hath often persuaded me to push
myself into the Company of my betters; 
but to say the Truth, I have an aukward
Pride in my Nature, which is better
pleased with being at the Head of
the lowest Class, than at the bottom of
the highest. Permit me to say, tho' the
Idea may be somewhat coarse, I had rather
stand on the Summit of a Dunghil,
than at the bottom of a Hill in Paradise; 
I have always thought it signifies little into
what Rank of Life I am thrown, provided
I make a great Figure therein; 
and should be as well satisfied with exerting
my Talents well at the Head of a
small Party or Gang, as in the Command
of a mighty Army; for I am far
from agreeing with you, that great
Parts are often buried in Oblivion; on
the contrary, I am convinced it is impossible
they should be so. I have often 

persuaded myself that there were not
fewer than a thousand in Alexander's
Troops capable of performing what Alexander
himself did. 
“But because such Spirits were not elected
or destined to an Imperial Command,
are we therefore to imagine they
came off without a Booty? Or that they
contented themselves with the Share in
common with their Comrades? Surely
no. In Civil Life, doubtless, the same
Genius, the same Inducements have often
composed the Statesman and the
Prig, for so we call what the Vulgar
name a Thief. The same Parts, the
same Actions often promote Men to the
Head of superior Societies, which raise
them to the Head of lower; and where
is the essential Difference if the one ends
on Tower-Hill, and the other at Tyburn? 
Hath the Block any Preference to the
Gallows, or the Ax to the Halter, but
what is given them by the ill-guided
Judgment of Men? You will pardon me
therefore if I am not so hastily enflamed
with the common Out-side of things, 

nor join the general Opinion in preferring
one State to another. A Guinea is as
valuable in a Leathern as in an embroidered
Purse; and a Codshead is a Codshead
still, whether in a Pewter or a Silver
Dish.” 
The Count replied as follows: “What
you have now said doth not lessen my
Idea of your Capacity; but confirms my
Opinion of the ill Effects of bad and
low Company. Can any Man doubt,
whether it is better to be a prime Minister,
or a common Thief? I have often
heard that the Devil used to say, where,
or to whom, I know not, that it was
better to reign in Hell, than be a Valet
de Chambre in Heaven, and perhaps he
was in the right; but sure if he had
had the Choice of both, he would
have chosen better. The Truth therefore
is, that, by low Conversation, we
contract a greater Awe for high Things
than they deserve. We decline great
Pursuits not from Contempt, but Despair. 
The Man who prefers the Highroad
to a more reputable Way of making 

his Fortune, doth it because he imagines
the one easier than the other: But
you yourself have asserted, and with undoubted
Truth, that the same Abilities
qualify you for undertaking, and the
same Means will bring you to your End
in both Journies; as, in Musick, it is the
same Tune whether you play it in a
higher or a lower Key. To instance in
some Particulars: Is it not the same Qualification
which enables this Man to hire
himself as a Servant, and get into the Confidence
and Secrets of his Master, in order
to rob him, and that to undertake
Trusts of the highest Nature with a Design
to break and betray them? Is it less
difficult, by false Tokens, to deceive a
Shopkeeper into the Delivery of his
Goods, which you afterwards run away
with, than to impose upon him by outward
Splendour and the Appearance of
Fortune, into a Credit, by which you
gain, and he loses twenty times as much. 
Doth it not require more Dexterity in
the Fingers to draw out a Man's Purse
from his Pocket, or to take a Lady's
Watch from her Side, without being 

perceived of any, an Excellence in which,
without Flattery, I am persuaded you
have no Superior, than to cog a Die,
or shuffle a Pack of Cards? Is not as much
Art, as many excellent Qualities, required
to make a pimping Porter at a
common Bawdy-House, as would enable
a Man to prostitute his own or his
Friend's Wife or Child? Doth it not ask
as good a Memory, as nimble an Invention,
as steady a Countenance, to
forswear yourself in Westminster-Hall,
as would furnish out a complete Ministerial
Tool, or perhaps a prime Minister
himself? It is needless to particularize
every Instance; in all we shall find, that
there is a nearer Connection between
high and low Life than is generally imagined,
and that a Highwayman is entitled
to more Favour with the Great
than he usually meets with. If therefore,
as I think I have proved, the same Parts
which qualify a Man for Eminence in a
low Sphere, qualify him likewise for
Eminence in a higher, sure it can be
no Doubt in which he should chuse to
exert them. Ambition, without which 

no one can be a great Man, will immediately
instruct him, in your own Phrase,
to prefer a Hill in Paradise to a Dunghil; 
nay, even Fear, a Passion the most
repugnant to Greatness, will shew him
how much more safely he may indulge
himself in the full and free Exertion of
his mighty Abilities in the higher, than
the lower Rank: Since Experience
teaches him, that there is a Crowd oftner
in one Year at Tyburn, than on Tower-Hill
in a Century.” Mr. Wild rejoined: 
That same Capacity which qualifies
a a  Mill-hen, a b  Bridle-cull, or a c  Buttock
and File, to arrive at any Degree of
Eminence in his Profession, would likewise
raise a Man in what the World esteem
a more honourable Calling, I do
not deny; nay, in many of your Instances
it is evident, that more Ingenuity,
more Art are necessary to the lower,
than the higher Proficients. If therefore
you had only contended, that every
Prig might might be a Statesman if he
pleased, I had readily agreed to it; but when 

you conclude, that it is his Interest to
be so, that Ambition would bid him
take that Alternative; in a Word, that a
Statesman is greater or happier than a
Prig, I must deny my Assent. But, in
comparing these two together, we must
carefully avoid being misled by the vulgar
erroneous Estimation of Things; for
Mankind err in Disquisitions of this Nature,
as Physicians do, who, in considering the
Operations of a Disease, have not a due
Regard to the Age and Complexion of
the Patient. The same Degree of Heat
which is common in this Constitution,
may be a Fever in that; in the same
manner, that which may be Riches or
Honour to me, may be Poverty or Disgrace
to another; for all these things are to be
estimated by Relation to the Person who
possesses them. A Booty of 10l. looks
as great in the Eye of a Bridle-cull, and
gives as much real Happiness to his
Fancy, as that of as many thousands to
the Statesman; and doth not the former
lay out his Acquisitions in Whores
and Fiddles, with much greater Joy and
Mirth, than the latter in Palaces and 

Pictures? What are the Flattery, the false
Compliments of his Gang to the Statesman,
when he himself must condemn
his own Blunders, and is obliged against
his Will to give Fortune the whole Honour
of his Success; what is the Pride
resulting from such sham Applause, compared
to the secret Satisfaction which a
Prig enjoys in his Mind, in reflecting on
a well-contrived and well-executed
Scheme. Perhaps indeed the greater
Danger is on the Prig's Side; but then
you must remember, that the greater
Honour is so too. When I mention Honour,
I mean that which is paid them
by their Gang; for that weak Part of
the World, which is vulgarly called THE
WISE, see both in a disadvantageous
and disgraceful Light: And as the Prig
enjoys (and merits too) the greater Degree
of Honour from his Gang, so doth
he suffer the less Disgrace from the
World, who think his Misdeeds, as they
call them, sufficiently at least punished
with a Halter, which at once puts an
End to his Pain and Infamy; whereas
the other is not only hated in Power, but 

detested and contemned at the Scaffold; 
and future Ages vent their Malice on
his Fame, while the other sleeps quiet
and forgotten. Besides, let us a little
consider the secret Quiet of their Consciences; 
how easy is the Reflection of
having taken a few Shillings or Pounds
from a Stranger, without any Breach of
Confidence, or perhaps any great Harm
to the Person who loses it, compared to that
of having betrayed a publick Trust, and
ruined the Fortunes of thousands. How
much braver is an Attack on the Highway,
than at a Gaming-Table; and
how much innocenter the Character of a
B&wblank;y-House than a C&wblank;t-Pimp?” 
He was eagerly proceeding when, casting
his Eyes on the Count, he perceived him
to be fast asleep, wherefore having gently
jogged him, in order to take his Leave,
and promised to return to him the next
Morning to Breakfast, they separated; the
Count retired to Rest, and Master Wild to
a Night-Cellar. 