


The Story of Mrs. Tilson. 
About three Days after David's Family
had been at Farmer Dunster's,
Mrs. Dunster was sent for by Mrs. Orgueil,
as she said, to settle some oeconomical Accounts; 
but in reality to sift into every Particular
of the Behaviour of all her present
Guests, in order to find out some Fault
in their Conduct, to prevent her Husband's
Generosity; thinking that now indeed the
Time was come, in which his Rule of Rectitude
would suffer him to do something
for David. 
Mrs. Dunster, with all the Eloquence she
was Mistress of, displayed David's Situation; 
said how much she pitied them, when they
fled to her House from the Fire, having no
Time, in their Hurry and Confusion, to
save any thing more than would just cover
them: and concluded her whole Speech with
a sudden Turn of Joy, that some good 

Christian had that Morning sent them some
necessary Cloathing. On which Mr. Orgueil
declared it to be very fit and right,
that in such Distress one human Creature
should assist another, as an Acknowledgment
that they were all dignified and exalted
above the brute Creation, by the Possession
of Reason. 
But now Mrs. Orgueil began to be seized
with her usual unnecessary Fear of her
Husband's Generosity; and in order to prevent
his exerting it, addressed herself to him
thus. 
“I know very well, my Dear, your generous
Way of thinking and acting, nor
is Mrs. Dunster, I believe, unacquainted
with your humane Manner of treating
your Tenants; and her Husband also
has distributed no small Share of your
Bounty to real Objects of Compassion:
but you always judiciously remember that
Charity begins at Home, and that it is
incumbent on every Man to take Care of
his own, and not ruin himself and his
Family for the sake of a romantic Friendship,
as Mr. Tilson did; which Story all
the Country knows.” 

“How was that pray, Madam (says my
Dame;) for thof Mr. Tilson lived in the
next Parish to us, we never heard a Word
of the Matter. And if he was ruin'd,
he must have met with some good Friend
who made up his Loss:  For besides what
he gave his Daughter Madam Bromly,
at her Marriage, Folks do say, that he
left his Lady a good Jointure, and his
other Daughter, Miss Nanny, a very
pretty Fortune.” 
“I don't know (replied Mrs Orgueil)
what low People call a good Jointure,
and a pretty Fortune; but I know when
Mr. Tilson married his Wife, he had an
Estate of two thousand Pounds a Year; 
and no People in the Country made a
genteeler Figure. Their House was a
Palace; and they drove their Coach and
six. Mrs. Tilson, when she went to London,
appeared at Court as well dressed,
and in as fine Jewels, as any Body; it
was thought by every one, that his
Daughters have been Coheiresses, and
that Miss Harriet, now Mrs. Bromly,
would have been married to my Lord
—; but to the Astonishment of every
one, Mr. Tilson rejected every Proposal; 

and at length it was discovered, that he had
for some Years been mortgaging his Estate,
to supply a young Fellow, whom he call'd
his Friend, with Money to recover a Fortune,
of which he pretended his Guardian
had cheated him. But just as the Affair
was like to come to a Tryal, the young
Fellow died; and Mr. Tilson had nothing
to do, but to regret his own Folly. He
directly sold his Estate, was reduced to
the poor Sum of six thousand Pounds,
and retired into this Country, ashamed to
see any of his former Acquaintance, who
had known him in his Prosperity. He
then bought that little Farm in which he
lately lived, and which he settled on his
Wife for the good Jointure you was mentioning. 
Poor Woman! a sad Reducement
from what she had reason to expect!
and Miss Harriet his youngest Daughter,
who had such great Offers in Warwickshire
was forced to take up with Mr. Bromly,
who has not above four hundred Pounds
a Year Estate; and the pretty Fortune that
he gave her, and left to Miss Nanny, is two
thousand Pounds. I am sure I should
not think that a pretty Fortune for my poor
dear little Creature. I should break my
Heart, if I thought it possible for her to
be reduced to such Necessity; but there 

is no Danger. She has too good a Father. 
And what was yet an Addition to
Mr. Tilson's Imprudence, was suffering
Miss Nanny to encourage the Addresses of
the young Fellow that ruin'd him; and
she instead of abhorring, still cherished
his Memory too much to admit any new
Lover.” 
“Why so indeed, I have heard Folks
say, (cries my Dame;) and for that Reason,
'tis thought as thof Madam Tilson's
Jointure, and Miss Nanny's Fortune, will
all come among Madam Bromly's Children.” 
“And suppose it should, (answered Mrs.
Orgueil) what great matter will that be
for such a growing Family? Madam
Bromly, as you call her, has three Children
already, and may have a Dozen more; 
and this good Jointure, and pretty Fortune,
and all they can scrape together, will
make no great Figure amongst ten or a
dozen Children. But for my part, when
I consider the great Fortune her Father
by his Imprudence lost, the very advantageous
Match with Lord—, lost also
by that Means, and her present reduced
Circumstances, I don't know a Person, 

I pity more than poor Mrs. Bromly. She
remembring the Prospect she had in her
Youth, must certainly be the most miserable
Woman in the World.” 
“Well, to be sure, Madam, (says Mrs.
Dunster) your Ladyship must know better
than we poor Folks do, who is to be
pitied, and who is not; thof all my
Neighbours be forever a talking of Mrs.
Bromly's Happiness; and by a Story I
heard t'other Day she was as lucky in
missing my Lord—, as in meeting
with her present Spouse; for they do say,
that he uses his Lady, who is as good a
Lady as ever lived, in a most cruel and
inhuman Manner, and is so ill-natured and
tyrannical to all his Servants and Tenants
that he is hated all the Country round. 
But I am told that there is not a better
natured Man upon Earth than Mr. Bromly; 
and as to old Madam Tilson, and Miss
Nanny, they be the goodest natured People
in all the Country, and by the kind
and charitable Actions they be always
doing to relieve their poor Neighbours,
one should think en so far, from ruined,
that they must be worth a Mint of
Money; nay, I have reason to fancy by
the Messenger that brought it, that the 

Present, which came to our House today,
came from Madam Tilson; and they
do seem so happy and contented in their
neat little Box of a House, and Madam do
seem so pleased with managing her Dairy
and feeding her Poultry, that one should
never have thought she had ever lived in a
House like a Palace, or rode in her Coach
and six.” 
“However you may fancy (says Mrs.
Orgueil) that you can find out People by
their Messengers, you may be mistaken,
Gammer; for there are more generous
People in the World than your Madam
Tilson. And however you may
fancy too, that from Report you can
know People's Characters and Affairs,
you may in that also be mistaken. For
I tell you, Dame Dunster, being reduced
from Forty thousand Pounds to Six, is
certainly being utterly ruined; and when
Mr. Tilson was living, notwithstanding
he appeared happy and chearful, yet
I doubt not (although he was too proud
to own it) but he had many miserable
Hours of Reflection, when he thought of
his own Imprudence, or he must have
been an insensible Brute.” Mrs. Dunster
could not here forbear saying, that “By 

Madam Tilson's Sorrow for his Loss, it
did not appear that she thought he had
ruined her.” 
“I know (said Mr. Orgueil) that Mrs.
Tilson was, for a long time, inconsolable
for his Loss; and I believe she was sincere; 
for the Man was good-natured; 
and being dead, you know none of his
Faults could rise up to her Remembrance:
but I doubt not, but when he
was living, she must, if she had any Spirit,
look on him with Horror and Indignation,
as being the Cause of her Ruin
and that of her poor dear Girls; for it is
a sad thing, Mrs. Dunster, for a Man,
under the Pretence of Friendship and
Generosity, to ruin his Wife and Family.” 
“It is very true, Madam;” answered
my Dame, making a low Curtsy, and taking
her Leave; for she had Sagacity enough to
perceive that this was not a proper Season
to urge any further the Distress of David or
his Family. But on Mrs. Dunster's going
away, Mrs. Orgueil called her back, and desired
young Camilla might be sent the next
Day (as it was Miss Cassy's Birth-day) to
play with her; but charged her not to mistake, 

and send little Joan; for that her
Daughter, by the great Advantage of her
Education, was got above being pleased
with childish Company. 
Mrs. Orgueil's Reason for telling this
Story is pretty plain. And she had in store
a dozen of the same Kind; with some one
of which she always entertained her Husband,
whenever she had any extraordinary
Fears of his Generosity. Mr. Orgueil, to
speak the Truth, seldom heard much of
them, for his Thoughts were otherwise employed; 
and he now sat as if in some deep
Debate with himself; whilst Mrs. Dunster,
who was a great Lover of Stories, greedily
hearkened after every Word. 
Mrs. Orgueil had an Art, by dropping
some Circumstances, and altering and adding
others, of turning any Story to whatever
Purpose she pleased. For the Truth
was, that Mr. Tilson originally had but Five
hundred a Year—that his Grand-father
owed this very Estate to the Family of the
young Gentleman whom he had supported
in his Law-suit—that his Daughter Nanny
was contracted to him; and although
she really had a very great Affection for
him, yet the Match, on the Success of the 

Law-Suit would have been very advantageous
of her Side—Mrs. Tilson never was
at Court in her Life—Mrs. Bromley had
really a great Escape by not marrying the
Nobleman, so much regretted by Mrs.
Orgueil—and was at that Time one of the
happiest Women in the World. 
Perhaps it may be wondered, that a Woman
of Mrs. Orgueil's Pride, should be so
familiar with Dame Dunster; but she piqued
herself greatly on her Affability with her
Neighbours; and where the Difference of
Station was incontestably great, she diverted
herself with the Thoughts of her
own Condescension. But Mrs. Dunster felt
a very essential Difference between the stately
Condescension of Mrs. Orgueil, and the
pleasing, unaffected Affability of either Camilla
or Cynthia. 