


More Greatness in Wild. A low
Scene between Mrs. Heartfree
and her Children, and a Scheme
of our Hero, worthy the highest
Admiration, and even Astonishment. 
When first he conducted his Flame
(or rather his Dish, to continue
our Metaphor) from the Proprietor, he had
projected a Design of conveying her to one
of those Eating-Houses in Covent-Garden,
where female Flesh is deliciously
drest, and served up to the greedy Appetites
of young Gentlemen; but fearing
lest she should not come readily enough into
his Wishes, and that, by too eager and
hasty a Pursuit, he should frustrate his future
Expectations, and luckily at the same
Time a noble Hint suggesting itself to him,
by which he might almost inevitably secure
his Pleasure, together with his Profit,
he contented himself with waiting on Mrs. 

Heartfree home, and, after many Protestations
of Friendship and Service to her Husband,
took his Leave, and promised to visit
her early in the Morning, and conduct
her back to Mr. Snap's. 
WILD now retired to a Night-Cellar,
where he found several of his Acquaintance,
with whom he spent the remaining Part
of the Night in revelling; nor did the least
Compassion for Heartfree's Misfortunes
disturb the Pleasure of his Cups. So truly
GREAT was his Soul, that it was absolutely
composed, save that an Apprehension of
Miss Tishy's making some Discovery (as
she was then in no good Temper towards
him) a little ruffled and disquieted the
perfect Serenity he would otherwise have
enjoyed. As he had, therefore, no Opportunity
of seeing her that Evening, he wrote her
a Letter full of ten thousand Protestations of
honourable Love, and (which he more depended
on) containing as many Promises, in
order to bring the young Lady into good
Humour, without acquainting her in the least
with his Suspicion, or giving her any Caution: 
For it was his constant Maxim, Never to put 

it into any one's Head to do you a Mischief,
by acquainting them that it is in their
Power. 
We must now return to Mrs. Heartfree,
who past a sleepless Night in as great Agonies
and Horrour for the Absence of her
Husband, as a fine well-bred Woman
would feel at the Return of her's from a
long Voyage or Journey. In the Morning
the Children being brought to her, the eldest
asked where dear Papa was? At
which she could not refrain from bursting
into Tears. The Child perciving it, said,
Don't cry, Mamma, I am sure Papa would
not stay abroad, if he could help it. At
which Words she caught the Child in her
Arms, and throwing herself into the Chair,
in an Agony of Passion, cried out, No, my
Child, nor shall all the Malice of Hell keep
us long asunder. 
These are Circumstances which we
should not, for the Amusement of six or
seven Readers only, have inserted, had
they not served to shew, that there are
Weaknesses in vulgar Life, which are commonly 

called Tenderness; to which great
Minds are so entirely Strangers, that they
have not even an Idea of them; and, secondly,
by exposing the Folly of this low Creature,
to set off and elevate that Greatness,
which we endeavour to draw a true Portrait
of in this History. 
WILD entering the Room, found the
Mother with one Child in her Arms, and
the other at her Knee. After paying her his
Compliments, he desired her to dismiss the
Children and Servant, for that he had
something of GREAT Moment to impart
to her. 
She immediately complied with his
Request, and, the Door being shut, asked
him with great Eagerness if he had succeeded
in his Intentions of procuring the Bail. 
He answered, he had not endeavoured at it
yet; for a Scheme had entered into his
Head, by which she might certainly preserve
her Husband, herself, and her Family. 
In order to which he advised her instantly
to remove with the most valuable
Jewels she had to Holland, before any Statute 

of Bankruptcy issued to prevent her; 
that he would himself attend her thither,
and place her in Safety, and then return to
deliver her Husband, who would be easily
able to satisfy his Creditors. He added, that
he was that Instant come from Snap's, where
he had communicated the Scheme to Heartfree,
who had greatly approved it, and desired
her to put it in Execution without
Delay, concluding that a Moment was not
to be lost. 
The Mention of her Husband's Approbation
left no Doubt in this poor Woman's
Breast, she only desired a Moment's Time
to pay him a Visit, in order to take her
Leave. But Wild peremptorily refused; he
said by every Moment's Delay she risqued
the Ruin of her Family; that she would be
absent only a few Days from him; adding,
that if she had not Resolution enough to
execute the Commands he brought her
from her Husband, his Ruin would lie at
her Door, and, for his own Part, he must
give up any farther meddling in his Affairs. 

She then proposed to take her Children
with her; but Wild would not permit it,
saying, they would only retard their Flight,
and that it would be properer for her Husband
to bring them. He at length absolutely
prevailed on this poor Woman, who
immediately packed up the most valuable
Effects she could find, and, after taking a
tender Leave of her Infants, earnestly commended
them to the Care of a very faithful
Servant. Then they called a Hackney-Coach,
which conveyed them to an Inn,
where they were furnished with a Chariot
and six, in which they set forward for
Harwich. 
WILD rode with an exulting Heart; 
secure, as he now thought himself, of the
Possession of that lovely Woman, together
with a rich Cargo. In short, he enjoyed
in his Mind all the Happiness which unbridled
Lust and rapacious Avarice could
promise him. As to the poor Creature,
who was to satisfy these Passions, her
whole Soul was employed in reflecting
on the Condition of her Husband and Children. 

A single Word scarce escaped her
Lips; while a Flood of Tears gushed from
her brilliant Eyes, which, if I may use a
coarse Expression, served only as delicious
Sauce to heighten the Appetite of Wild. 