


The Conclusion of Mrs. Heartfree's
Adventures. 
“If I mistake not, I was interrupted
just as I was beginning to repeat
some of the Compliments made me by
the Hermite. —Just as you had finished
them, I believe, Madam, said the Justice. 
Very well, Sir, said she, I am
sure I have no Pleasure in the Repetition. 
He concluded then with telling
me, Though I was, in his Eyes, the most
charming Woman in the World, and
might tempt a Saint to abandon the
Ways of Holiness, yet my Beauty inspired
him with a much tenderer Affection
towards me, than to purchase any Satisfaction
of his own Desires with my Misery; 
if therefore I could be so cruel to
him, to reject his honest and sincere Address,
nor could submit to a solitary Life
with one, who would endeavour, by all
possible Means, to make me happy, I 

had no Force to dread; for that I was
as much at my Liberty as if I was in
France, or England, or any other free
Country. I repulsed him with the same
Civility with which he advanced; and
told him, that as he professed great Regard
to Religion, I was convinced he would
cease from all farther Solicitation, when I
informed him, that, if I had no other Objection,
my own Innocence would not
admit of my hearing him on this Subject,
for that I was married. —He started
a little at that Word, and was for
some time silent; but at length recovering
himself, he began to urge the Uncertainty
of my Husband's being alive, and
the Probability of the contrary; he then
spoke of Marriage as of a civil Policy
only; on which Head he urged many
Arguments not worth repeating, and was
growing so very eager and importunate,
that I know not whither his Passion
might have hurried him, had not three
of the Sailors well armed, appeared at
that Instant in Sight of the Cave. I no
sooner saw them, than, exulting with
the utmost inward Joy, I told him my 

Companions were come for me, and that
I must now take my Leave of him; assuring
him, that I would always remember,
with the most grateful Acknowledgment,
the Favours I had received
at his Hands. He fetched a very heavy
Sigh, and, squeezing me tenderly by
the Hand, he saluted my Lips with a
little more Eagerness than the European
Salutations admit of; and told me, he
should likewise remember my Arrival at
his Cave to the last Day of his Life; adding,
—O that he could there spend
the whole in the Company of one,
whose bright Eyes had kindled—; 
but I know you will think, Sir, that we,
Women, love to repeat the Compliments
made us, I will therefore omit them. 
In a Word, the Sailors being now arrived,
I quitted him, with some Compassion
for the Reluctance with which he
parted from me, and went forward with
my Companions. 
“We had proceeded but a very few Paces
before one of the Sailors said to his Comrades: 
D&wblank;n me, Jack, who knows 

whether you Fellow hath not some good
Flip in his Cave? I innocently answered,
the poor Wretch had only one Bottle of
Brandy. —Hath he so, cries the Sailor: 
'Fore George we will taste it;—and,
so saying, they immediately returned
back, and myself with them. We found
the poor Man prostrate on the Ground,
expressing all the Symptoms of Misery
and Lamentation. I told him in French,
(for the Sailors could not speak that
Language) what they wanted. —He
pointed to the Place where the Bottle
was deposited, saying, they were Welcome
to that, and whatever else he had; 
and added, he cared not if they took
his Life also. The Sailors searched
the whole Cave, where finding nothing
more which they deemed worth their
taking, they walked off with the Bottle,
and, immediately emptying it, without
offering me a Drop, they proceeded with
me towards the Town. 
“In our Way I observed one whisper
another, while he kept his Eye stedfastly
fixed on me. This gave me some Uneasiness; 

but the other answered: No,
d&wblank;n me, the Captain will never forgive
us. Besides, we have enough of
it among the black Women, and, in
my Mind, one Colour is as good as another. 
This was enough to give me violent
Apprehensions; but I heard no
more of that kind, 'till we came to the
Town, where, in about six Hours, I arrived
in Safety. 
“As soon as I came to the Captain,
he enquired what was become of my
Friend, meaning the villainous Count. 
When he was informed by me of what
had happened, he wished me heartily
Joy of my Delivery, and, expressing the
utmost Abhorrence of such Baseness, swore,
if ever he met him, he would cut his
Throat; but indeed we both concluded,
that he had died of the Blow which the
Hermite had given him. 
“I was now introduced to the Mayor,
or chief Magistrate of this Country, who
was desirous of seeing me. I will give
you a short Description of him: He 

was chosen (as is the Custom there) for
his superior Bravery and Wisdom. His
Power is entirely absolute during its
Continuance; but, on the first Deviation
from Equity and Justice, he is liable to
be deposed, and punished by the People,
the Elders of whom, once a Year, assemble,
to examine into his Conduct. 
Besides the Danger which these Examinations,
which are very strict, expose
him to, his Office is of such Care and
Trouble, that nothing but that restless
Love of Power, so predominant in
the Mind of Man, could make it the
Object of Desire; for he is indeed the
only Slave of all the Natives of this
Country. He is obliged, in Time of
Peace, to hear the Complaint of every
Person in his Dominions, and to render
him Justice. For which purpose every
one may demand an Audience of him,
unless during the Hour which he is allowed
for Dinner, when he sits alone
at the Table, and is attended, in the
most public Manner, with more than
European Ceremony. This is done to
create an Awe and Respect towards him 

in the Eye of the Vulgar; but, lest it
should elevate him too much in his own
Opinion, in order to his Humiliation, he
receives every Evening in private, from a
kind of Beadle, a gentle Kick on his
Posteriors; besides which, he wears a
Ring in his Nose, somewhat resembling
that we ring our Pigs with, and a Chain
round his Neck, not unlike that worn
by our Aldermen; both which, I suppose,
emblematical, but heard not the Reasons
of either assigned. There are many more
Particularities among these People,
which, when I have an Opportunity, I
may relate to you. The second Day after
my Return from Court, one of his
Officers, whom they call Schach Pimpach,
waited upon me, and, by a French
Interpreter who lives here, informed me,
that the Mayor liked my Person, and
offered me an immense Present, if I would
suffer him to enjoy it, (this is, it seems,
their common Form of making Love.) 
I rejected the Present, and never heard
any further Solicitation; for, as it is no
Shame for the Women here to consent at 

the first Proposal, so they never receive
a second. 
“I had resided in this Town a Week,
when the Captain informed me, that a
Number of Slaves, who had been taken
Captives in War, were to be guarded to
the Sea-side, where they were to be sold to
the Merchants, who traded in them to
America; that if I would embrace this
Opportunity, I might assure myself of
finding a Passage to America, and thence
to England; acquainting me at the same
time, that he himself intended to go
with them. I readily agreed to accompany
him. The Mayor, being advertised
of our Designs, sent for us both to
Court, and, without mentioning a Word
of Love to me, having presented me
with a very rich Jewel, of less Value,
he said, than my Chastity, took his
Leave, recommending me to the Care of
God, and ordering us a large Supply of
Provisions for our Journey. 
“We were provided with Mules for
ourselves, and what we carried with us, 

and, in nine Days, reached the Seashore,
where we found an English Vessel
ready to receive both us and the Slaves. 
We went aboard it, and sailed the next
Day with a fair Wind for New England,
where I hoped to get an immediate Passage
to the Old: But Providence was
kinder than my Expectation; for the
third Day after we were at Sea, we met
an English Man of War homeward
bound; the Captain of it was a very
good-natured Man, and agreed to take
me on Board. I accordingly took my
Leave of my old Friend the Master of
the shipwrecked Vessel, who went on to
New England, whence he intended to
pass to Jamaica, where his Owners lived. 
I was now treated with great Civility,
had a little Cabbin assigned me, and
dined every Day at the Captain's Table,
who was indeed a very gallant Man,
and, at first, made me a Tender of his
Affections; but, when he found me resolutely
bent to preserve myself pure
and entire for the best of Husbands, he
grew cooler in his Addresses, and soon
behaved in a manner very pleasing to me, 

regarding my Sex only so far as to pay
me a Deference, which is very agreeable
to us all. 
“To conclude my Story; I met with
no Adventure in this Passage at all worth
relating, 'till my landing at Gravesend,
whence the Captain brought me in his
own Boat to the Tower. In a short Hour
after my Arrival we had that Meeting,
which, however dreadful at first, will, I
now hope, by the good Offices of the
best of Men, whom God for ever bless,
end in our perfect Happiness, and be
a strong Instance of what I am persuaded
is the surest Truth, That
Providence will, sooner or later, procure
the Felicity of the virtuous and innocent.” 
Mrs. Heartfree thus ended her
Speech, having before delivered to her
Husband the Jewels, which the Count had
robbed him of, and that presented her by
the African Mayor, which latter was of
immense Value. The good Magistrate was
sensibly touched at her Narrative, as well 

on the Consideration of the Sufferings she
had herself undergone, as for those of her
Husband, which he had himself been
innocenly the Instrument of bringing
upon him. That worthy Man, however,
much rejoiced in what he had already done
for his Preservation, and promised to labour,
with his utmost Interest and Industry,
to procure the absolute Pardon, rather
of his Sentence, than of his Guilt, which,
he now plainly discovered was a barbarous
and false Imputation. 