
Contains, among other particulars, a more full explanation of Jemmy's innocence in some things which had very much the appearance of being criminal. 
Jemmy had no sooner taken leave of mr. Ellwood, than he wrote to lady Hardy,—telling her, that an unavoidable necessity had torn him from his wishes;—that he was compell'd to go into the country the next morning, and consequently must be deprived of the pleasure of meeting her, as he had hoped, according to appointment; but added, that he should return in a very short time, and then enjoy the happiness he languished for. —This he inclosed in another to mrs. Comode, with an intreaty that she would convey it as directed with all expedition and secrecy. 
That necessary friend discharged the trust reposed in her with so much diligence, that on his coming home pretty early from Vaux-Hall, where he had been that evening with some company, he found a letter from mrs. Comode, with another inclosed in it from lady Hardy, in answer to his billet;—the contents of both were as follow: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Honour'd sir, 
“I Know not what you will find in the inclosed, tho' it was wrote at my house, and I saw it wetted with tears falling from a pair of the most beautiful eyes in the world. —I doubt not, however, but you will soon dry them up:—it would, indeed, be a great pity that two such charming persons should have any cause of complaint against each other. —You will pardon this freedom, as it springs from my zeal for your mutual happiness, to which you may assure yourself I shall always be proud to contribute, being, 
“With the most profound respect,
Honoured, sir,
Your very faithful
And obsequious servant,
B. Comode.” 

By this prelude he easily guess'd what was the purport of the other, so was not surprised at the reproaches it contained. 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Sir,
“I have just now received yours by the hands of mrs. Comode; and sir Thomas being abroad I have the opportunity of disburthening myself of some part of that mingled astonishment and grief your cruel epistle has involved me in. —Oh, mr. Jessamy, how can you treat with such indifference a woman who loves you to distraction!—nothing but yourself could ever have made me believe you were capable of behaving towards me in this manner. —Is this the effect of all your soft professions? —Is this the recompence of the fondness I have shewn to you? —You find me ready to risque every thing for you,—virtue,—duty, reputation;—nay, the dangers of eternal ruin are too weak to deter me from flying to your arms: should any other engagement then,—any business,—any pleasure, have the power to snatch you from me? —The excuses you make might have pass'd well enough with 
me when I was the ignorant unjudging Celia of the Woods; but time, reading, and observation has now informed me better, and I know what a woman has a right to expect from the man who has a real passion for her;—but I see you are insensible,—ungrateful,—yet still I love you; and, in spite of my resentment, cannot help wishing you a prosperous journey and a safe return. —You promise me that it shall be speedy; but I know not how to give credit to your words; the sooner you come back, however, the more you will be intitled to the forgiveness of 
“Your too much devoted
Celia.” 
“P.S. Sir Thomas talks of staying in London all next winter;—this would be joyful news to me indeed, if I could flatter myself with a belief you wish'd it so; but dare not hope too much after the cruel disappointment you have given me.” 

Till the receipt of this Jemmy though he had done with lady Hardy till his return from Bedfordshire; but he now found himself under a necessity either of 
writing to her again, or of giving her cause to complain of his want of politeness as well as love. 
With the pleasures of an amorous intrigue there will be always some mixture of fatigue;—Jemmy liked to enjoy the one, but was not of a humour to endure much of the other, especially at present; and the tender reproaches and accusation in this letter seem'd to him so many impertinencies which he would gladly have been able to dispense with himself from answering. 
He was also obliged to write to Jenny that same night, in order to give her an account of the motive that carried him to Ham-Hall, at the very instant that he was about to gratify his inclinations in following her to Bath; but this was a task which he was far from feeling any reluctance in the performance of;—so widely different are the effects of an honourable and a dishonourable passion. 
This puts me in mind of a very just as well as beautiful Hieroglyphic, which I once saw among the paintings of Titian; the capital figures in the piece were two Cupids, the one coming down from Jupiter in a milk-white robe, his sparkling eyes 
wide open, and garlands in his hands of fresh and unmix'd sweets, ready to crown the brows of every faithful votary:—the other in a garment of a dusky yellow, spatter'd all over with black, seem'd ascending from the earth,—condens'd vapours encircled his head,—a bandage cover'd his eyes, and in his impure hands were wreaths of half-shed faded roses, thinly blended with thorns and prickly briars. 
The ancients were extremely fond of expressing their designs by emblems, and this custom, which is as old as the Syriac and Chaldean, is still retain'd throughout the greatest part of Europe in the devices on their shields; so that by looking on the escutcheon of any family, it is easy to know for what great action it was at first distinguish'd;—and this, methinks, should remind those who wear them to act in such a manner as may render themselves worthy of the honours acquir'd for them by their progenitors;—otherwise they are no more, according to the words of a late author, than 
Dignify'd dregs of Britain's fall'n race,Honour's dishonour, and fame's last disgrace.
But this is not a work in which remonstrances are to be expected, nor perhaps would be greatly relish'd;—I shall therefore leave the world such as it is, and without being much of a prophet, one may say is like to be, and return to the subject of my history. 
Jemmy wrote a long letter to his dear Jenny, in which he acquainted her with all the particulars relating to the journey he was about to take, in compliance with mr. Ellwood's invitations; and express'd the utmost discontent at an accident which hinder'd him from going to Bath so soon as he had design'd, and hoped to have done. 
Having finish'd this, he set himself about answering the complaint of lady Hardy, which he did in terms that have no occasion to be repeated, this letter having been already inserted in the fifth chapter of this volume, to which if the reader takes the trouble to turn back he will easily perceive to be the same that by one of the caprices of fortune fell into the hands of Jenny, and threw her into the condition there described. 
Jemmy in this point acted like some careless Apothecaries, who, by fixing wrong labels on the potions they prepare, frequently destroy one patient by what would have given relief to another;—so he having seal'd both the letters before he wrote the superscription of either, directed that he design'd for Jenny to lady Hardy; and by consequence that for lady Hardy to Jenny. 
Quite ignorant of the mischief his inadvertency would occasion, he sent a servant with these dispatches,—the one to be left at mrs. Comode's, and the other at the Post-house. 
About five the next morning the impatient mr. Ellwood call'd on him in his travelling coach;—what unwillingness soever he had testify'd for this expedition, he had taken care that every thing necessary for it should be prepar'd against the coming of his friend, so being entirely ready, they set out together immediately, attended by the servants belonging to both of them. 
The coachman having orders to make all the speed he could, the horses being full of spirit, the road good, and no bad accident retarding the progress of their 
journey, they arrived at Ham-Hall that same evening, where it is not to be doubted but they were received by the intended bridegroom with all the demonstrations imaginable of joy,—of duty to the one, and affection to the other. 
The wedding was not solemniz'd till two days after, on account of some writings which had waited for the old gentleman to sign, he having agreed to settle a pretty large part of his estate upon his son at this marriage. 
I will not trouble my reader with any description of these nuptials, though they were celebrated with as much magnificence as the rank of the persons and the place they were in would admit of, without incurring the censure of vanity and ostentation;—Jemmy stay'd there eight days, and was then obliged to tear himself away from his kind hosts, who would not have suffer'd him to part so soon but on the score of his impatience to be with Jenny, and the reasons he had given mr. Ellwood for it. 
