
Is dull enough to please those who take an ill-natur'd delight in finding something to condemn; yet is not without occurrences which will keep awake the attention of such who read with a desire of being agreeably amused. 
The lady who came to visit Jenny was extremely good humour'd, but a little too talkative;—she never exceeded the bounds of truth in any thing she said, but gave herself not the trouble of considering how far the truths she utter'd were proper to be reveal 
I have observ'd that people of this temper frequently do as much mischief, without designing it, as those of the most malicious intentions are capable of; and though sincerity be among the number of the most valuable virtues, yet there are many circumstances wherein to speak all one knows may produce as bad consequences as to speak more than one knows. 
I never happen into the company of either man or woman of this stamp but I have fresh in my memory some lines I formerly read in Browne's works. 
Those babbling ecchos of whate'er they hear,
Fame's menial servants, who her tidings bear,
Sow such dissention, kindle such debate,
As turns all sweet to sour, all love to hate.
But to return to my subject;—Belpine had no sooner left the two ladies together than Jenny's friend began to express some wonder at seeing her in town so much before the time she was expected: —‘What, cried she, is there any disagreement between you and mr. Jessamy?’ 
‘No, not any, reply'd Jenny, a little startled at the question; but wherefore do you ask?’ —‘Nay, resumed the other, it was only a foolish imagination of my own;—not but I had some reason for it too:—you must know that I thought you had been told something of him that had made you angry—and so when you heard he was coming 
down to Bath you immediately flounced up to London.’ 
‘All a mistake upon my word, said Jenny; the ladies I was with had some business in town, and my unwillingness to be left behind was the sole cause of my returning to London so soon. —But pray what put such a thing into your head?’ 
‘I did not think to tell you, answer'd this fair gossip; but since you press me,—though I am afraid it will vex you,—yet I think too you ought to know it;—and if you will promise me not to fret I will let you into the whole secret.’ 
Jenny then said that she should listen without pain to any thing she had to relate; and gave her many more assurances of her philosophy in this point than she had occasion to do, as the other was no less impatient to disburthen herself of the secret than she was to be made a sharer in it. 
‘Well,—men will be men, said the lady;—there is no such a thing as changing nature;—but sure I made the discovery I am going to tell you by 
the oddest accident that ever was;—I suppose you know mrs. Comode, the habit-maker.’ —‘No, replied Jenny, but I have heard of her.’ 
‘I buy all my things of her, resumed the other, she has vast business, and I think the genteelest fancy of any woman of her profession about town; every thing she makes up sets with such an air; you must know I had bespoke a fly petticoat with fringes of her;—it not being sent home according to the time she promised, I called in one morning as I passed that way to see if it was done;—she made a thousand apologies, and said I should have it that day; but I scolded heartily, and insisted upon seeing how near it was finished, on which she ran up to fetch it, leaving me alone in the shop. 
‘The moment she was gone, continu'd this tale-monger, I found my garter was slipt,—I durst not venture to tie it up in that place for fear somebody should come in, but was running into a little room behind the shop;—but, Lord, I shall never forget how I was surprised,—I had no sooner push'd open 
the door than—who do you think I saw there?’ 
‘I cannot guess indeed, my dear, but expect you will inform me, reply'd Jenny,’—‘Why no other, said she than the very individual mr. Jessamy;—do not be uneasy now,—fitting as close to a fine lady as two kernels in a nut-shell, hand in hand, and one of his arms across her shoulder; they were so earnest in discourse, that they either did not hear the door open, or thought it was mrs. Comode herself; but both seem'd in great confusion, and started from their seats when I came in:—whether mr. Jessamy saw enough of me to distinguish who I was I know not; for I only cried,—I ask pardon, and went out of the room with as much haste as I had enter'd. 
‘Mrs. Comode came down presently after, and brought the petticoat; but I was in such a consternation at what I had seen, that I could scarce look upon it:—I told her of what had happen'd, but did not say I knew either of the parties;—she appear'd very much shock'd, but made an aukward excuse,—said they were two of her customers 
that had been walking that morning and came in to beg a pot of tea; on which I took no farther notice, but have had no good opinion of her ever since.’ 
‘Some woman of the town, I suppose, said Jenny; Pray what sort of creature was it he had with him?’ —‘Nay, answer'd the other, you cannot think it possible for me to give any particular description of her by the momentary glimpse I had of her; but I cannot say that altogether she look'd like such a person.’ 
Jenny had boasted of so much fortitude that she was a little vex'd she had betray'd any want of it by the question she had ask'd; but she afterwards attoned for it by affecting the most perfect indifference during the rest of the conversation they had together on this subject, which lasted almost the whole time the lady staid. 
Nothing is more painful than when the mind is discomposed to be under a necessity of concealing it;—Jenny had been impatient to be alone long before she was so; and found a good deal of ease when she attain'd an opportunity of reflecting at leisure on what she had heard. 
The story told her by this lady had not so much affected her as the hint given her by Belpine, concerning a supposition that the match between her and Jemmy was on the point of being broke off,—this tallying so exactly with the intelligence sent to lady Speck at Bath, convinced her that such a thing was really talk'd of in town, and could not but very much alarm both her love and pride. 
Yet when she remember'd her lover's tender letter from Ham-Hall, and the many others she had received from him while she was at Bath, besides the haste she found he had made in hurrying down to that place in expectation of meeting her there, she could not tell how to think it possible that, if guilty as represented, he could be capable of such deceit. 
‘There is no answering for the hearts of men, said she, love is an involuntary passion,—chance or fatality directs the choice, and sometimes a single moment undoes the work of years;—I should not be surprised that Jemmy happen'd to see a face which had more charms for him than mine;—but wherefore then should he carry on the deception 
with me?—how would it avail his new flame to pretend to prosecute a former one? —No, continued she after pausing a little;—for him to act in this manner would be as inconsistent with reason and common-sense as with honour and justice; and it would also be the utmost weakness in me to believe it.’ 
Thus did she make herself tolerably easy as to the main part of what was laid to his charge; but as to his having enter'd into an affair of gallantry, she had too plain a proof of that under his own hand writing to admit the least room for doubt, and needed not the confirmation she had just received of it from her friend. 
Upon the whole, however, few young ladies in her circumstances would have suffer'd less inquietude; and this must be said of her, that it was much more difficult to raise any tempest in her mind, than it was to calm that tempest after it had been raised. 
Neither grief nor anger had the power to affect her long, or to drive her to any excesses while they lasted,—a humour extremely volatile,—a great deal of good 
nature, and an equal share of understanding, were happily united in her composition, and made her always ready to believe the best, and to forgive the worst. 
The small remains of resentment and discontent, on the various occasions that had been given her for both, were entirely dissipated, when, on the evening of the succeeding day, she received a letter from Jemmy,—the contents whereof were as follow: 
To miss Jessamy.
“My more than ever dear Jenny,
I have certainly been of late one of the most unlucky fellows in the universe,—first to be detained by a series of cross accidents from following you in a few days, as I proposed;—then, when I had dispatch'd those vexatious affairs, and just upon the wing to fly to Bath, to be dragg'd to another quarter of the kingdom, by one whose intreaties you know I could not well deny;—and lastly, when got free from every care but my impatience to be with you, I arrived here full fraught with the expectations of meeting all my soul holds dear, to find you had left the place scarce 
twenty-four hours before I came;—judge how sincerely I am mortified:—I suppose the caprice of those you were with carried you so suddenly from hence; but I hope the day is now very near at hand when those who take you will be obliged to take me also; for indeed, my dear Jenny, I am quite weary of this life: whenever I am from you for any length of time I feel methinks as if separated from myself;—the more I see of other women, the more I regret the absence of my dear Jenny:—as I came hither pretty early last night, I went to the Long-room,—there were a great many fine ladies there; but all their beauties are without a charm for me;—I can be gay but not happy in their company;—the power of giving true felicity to Jemmy is reserved only for his dear, dear Jenny. 
“I give you warning therefore, not to think of delaying any longer a blessing I have been made to hope ever since my first putting on breeches reminded me that if I lived I should be one day a man; but be assured I should have little joy in being so, if it were not for the expectation of being yours 
by a more tender title than that with which I now subscribe myself, 
“Unalterably and inviolably,
My dear dear Jenny's
Most passionately devoted,
Most faithful lover,
And ever humble
And obedient servant,
J. Jessamy.” 
P. S. “I would have set out tomorrow morning on my return for London, but my servant got an ugly fall from his horse in coming hither, and is very much bruised, so am willing to give him one day to recover himself; but hope the next to be so far on my journey towards you, as that there will be but a few hours distance between your receiving this and the author of it,—till when I am, my dear dear Jenny, 
“Yours as above.” 

Jenny was now in such great good humour with her lover, that she grew half resolved to consent to his desires for 
the consummation of their marriage, if it were only to put a final end to those idle reports which had been spread concerning his having an intention to break it off. 
But before we bring them together again, it is highly necessary that the reader should be made fully acquainted with the manner in which Jemmy had passed his time during this little separation, and also to clear up those parts of his conduct which have hitherto appeared mysterious. 
