

Is the recital of some accidents, as little
possible to be foreseen by the reader,
as they were by the persons to whom
they happened. 
In youth, when the blood runs high,
and the spirits are in full vivacity,
affliction must come very heavy indeed,
when it makes any deep or lasting impression
on the mind. —That vexation
which miss Betsy had brought upon herself,
by going to the play with miss Forward,
was severe enough the whole night,
and the ensuing day. —A great while,
it must be confessed, for a person of her
volatile disposition, and when the more
violent emotions had subsided, the terror
she had lately sustained, had, at least, this
good effect upon her, it made her resolve
to take all possible precautions not
to fall into the like danger again. —As
she had an infinite deal of generosity in
her nature, when not obscured by that
pride and vanity which the flatteries she
had been but too much accustomed to, 
had inspired her with, she could not reflect
how ill she had treated mr. Trueworth,
and the little regard she had paid
to the tender concern he had shewn for
her reputation, without thinking she ought
to ask his pardon, and acknowledge she
had been in the wrong. —If mr. Trueworth
could have known the humour she
was at present in, how readily would he
have flown to her with all the wings of
love and kind forgiveness; but as he had
not the spirit of divination, and could
only judge of her sentiments by her behaviour,
it was not in his power to conceive
how great a change had happened
in his favour, through a just sensibility
of her own error. 
She, in the mean time, little imagined
how far he resented the treatment she had
given him, especially as she heard he had
been to wait upon her the day in which
she saw no company, and after having
past a night of much more tranquility
than the former had been, went down in
the morning to breakfast, with her usual
chearfulness;—she had not been many
minutes in the parlour, before she was
agreeably surprized with the sight of her
elder brother, mr. Francis Thoughtless,
who, it seems, had arrived the night before. 
—After the first welcomes were 
over, mr. Goodman asked him, Wherefore
he did not come directly to his
house? saying, he had always a spare bed
to accommodate a friend: —To which
the other replied, that he had come from
Paris with some company, whom he
could not quit, and that they had lain at
the Hummums. —Miss Betsy was extremely
transported at his return, and said a
thousand obliging things to him, all
which he answered with more politeness
than tenderness, and this young lady soon
perceived by this specimen of his carriage
to her, that she was not to expect the
same affection from him, as she had received
so many proofs of from her younger
brother. 
His long absence from England, and
some attachments he had found abroad,
had, indeed, very much taken off that
warmth of kindness he would, doubtless,
otherwise have felt for an only sister, and
one who appeared so worthy of his love. 
—As mr. Goodman had acquainted him
by letter, that he had hired a house for
him, according to his request, the chief
of their conversation turned on that subject,
and as soon as breakfast was over,
they took a walk together to see it:— 
on their return he seemed very much
pleased with the choice mr. Goodman had 
made, and the little time he stayed was
entirely taken up with consulting lady
Mellasin, his sister, and miss Flora, concerning
the manner in which he should
ornament it; for the honest guardian had
taken care to provide all such furniture,
as he thought would be necessary for a
single gentleman. 
No intreaties were wanting to prevail
on him, to make that house his home,
till his own was thoroughly aired, and
in all respects fit for him to go into; 
but he excused himself, saying, he could
not leave the friends he had travelled with,
till they were provided for as well as
himself, nor could all mr. Goodman, and
the ladies urge, perswade him to dine
with them that day. 
It must be acknowleged, that this positive
refusal of every thing that was desired
of him, had not in it all that complaisance,
which might have been expected
from a person just come from among a
people more famous for their politeness,
than their sincerity. 
But he had his own reasons, which the
family of mr. Goodman as yet were far
from suspecting, which made him act in
the manner he now did; and it was not, 
in reality, the want of French breeding,
but the want of true old English resolution,
that enforced this seeming negligence
and abruptness. 
After he was gone, mr. Goodman went
to 'Change, but was scarce entered into
the walk, where he had appointed to
meet some merchants, when he was accosted
by two rough ill-looked fellows,
who demanded his sword, and told him,
they had a writ against him,—that he
was their prisoner, and must go with
them. 
Mr. Goodman, who had as little reason
as any man living to suspect an insult of
this nature, only smiled, and told them,
they were mistaken in the person. — 
“No, no,” said one of them, “we
are right enough, if you are mr. Samuel
Goodman.” —“My name is
Samuel Goodman,” replied he; “but
I do not know that it stands in any
man's books for debt;—but pray,” 
continued he, “at whose suit am I arrested?” 
—“At the suit of mr. Oliver
Marplus,” said the other officer. — 
“I have no dealings with any such person,” 
cried mr. Goodman, “nor even
ever heard the name of him you mention.” 
—They then told him, it was 
his business to prove that,—they did but
do their duty, and he must obey the
writ. —Mr. Goodman on this, knowing
they were not the persons with whom this
matter should be contested, readily went
where they conducted him, which was to
a house belonging to him who appeared to
be principal of the two. —As they were
coming off 'Change, he bad his coachman
drive his chariot home, and tell his
lady, that he believed he should not dine
with her that day; but he kept his footman
with him, to send on what messages
he should find convenient. 
The officer, knowing his condition,
and not doubting but he should have a
handsome present for civility-money, used
him with a great deal of respect, when
he had got him into his house; and, on
his desiring to be informed of the lawyer's
name, employed in the action, he immediately
told him, and also for what sum
he was arrested, which was no less than
two thousand, five hundred, and seventy-five
pounds, eight shillings. —“A pretty
parcel of money truly,” said mr.
Goodman, “I wonder in what dream I
contracted this debt.” —He then called
for pen, ink, and paper, and wrote a
line to his lawyer in the Temple, desiring
him to go to the other, who, they said, 
was concerned against him, and find out
the truth of this affair. 
The honest old gentleman having sent
this letter by his servant, called for something
to eat, and was extremely facetious
and pleasant with the officers, not doubting
but that what had happened was occasioned
through some mistake or other,
and he should immediately be discharged,
when the thing was enquired into;— 
but his present good humour was changed
into one altogether the reverse, when his
own lawyer, accompanied by him who
was engaged for his adversary, came to
him, and told him, there was no remedy
but to give bail;—that the suit commenced
against him, was on account of
a bond given by lady Mellasin to mr.
Oliver Marplus, some few days previous
to her marriage. —'Tis hard to say, whether
surprise or rage was most predominant
in the soul of this much-injured husband,
at so shocking a piece of intelligence. 
—He demanded to see the bond,
which request being granted, he found it,
not as he at first flattered himself, a forgery,
but signed with his wife's own
hand, and witnessed by mrs. Prinks her
woman, and another person whom he
knew not. 
It is certain, that no confusion ever
exceeded that of mr. Goodman's, at this
time;—he sat like one transfixed with
thunder, and was wholly incapable of uttering
one syllable;—he appeared to the
company as lost in thought; but was indeed
almost past the power of thinking,
till his lawyer roused him with these
words,—“Come, sir,” said he, “you
see how the case stands,—there is no
time to be lost,—you must either pay
the money down, or get immediate
security; for I suppose you would not
chuse to lie here to-night.” —This
seasonable admonition brought him a
little to himself:—he now began to
reflect what it would best become him to
do, and after a pause of some moments,
“I believe,” said he, “that I have now
in my house more than the sum in
bills, that would discharge this bond,
but I would willingly hear what this
woman has to say before I pay the
money, and will therefore give in bail.” 
—Accordingly he sent for two citizens
of great worth and credit, to desire them
to come to him;—they instantly complied
with this summons, and the whole
affair being repeated to them, voluntarily
offered to be his sureties. 
Bail bonds were easily procured, but
it took up so much time in filling them
up, and discharging the fees, and other
consequential expences, that it was past
one o'clock before all was over, and mr.
Goodman had liberty to return to his
own habitation. 
It was very seldom that mr. Goodman
stayed late abroad; but whenever any
thing happened that obliged him to do
so, lady Mellasin, through the great
affection she pretended to have for him,
would never go to bed till his return. 
—Mrs. Prinks for the most part was her
sole companion in such cases; but it so
fell out, that this night neither of the
two young ladies had any inclination to
sleep:—miss Flora's head was full of
the abovementioned plot, and the anxiety
for its success;—the remembrance of the
late adventure at miss Forward's, was not
yet quite dissipated in miss Betsy;—the
coldness with which she imagined herself
treated by her elder brother, with whom
she had flattered herself of living, and being
very happy under his protection, gave
her a good deal of uneasiness. —To add
to all these matters of disquiet, she had
also received that afternoon a letter from
mr. Francis Thoughtless, acquainting her, 
that he had had the misfortune to be so
much bruised by a fall he got from his
horse, that it was utterly impossible for
him to travel, and she must not expect
him in town yet for some days. 
The ladies were all together, sitting in
the parlour, each chusing rather to indulge
her own private meditations, than
to hold discourse with the others, when
mr. Goodman came home. —Lady Mellasin
ran to embrace him with a shew of
the greatest tenderness,—“My dear mr.
Goodman,” cried she, “how much
have I suffered from my fears, lest
some ill accident should have befallen
you!” —“The worst that could have
happened has befallen me,” replied he,
thrusting her from him; “yet no more
than what you might very reasonably
expect would one day or another
happen.” —“What do you mean,
my dear,” said she, more alarmed at
his words and looks than she made shew
of? —“You may too easily inform yourself
what 'tis I mean,” cried he, hastily,
“on the retrospect of your behaviour. 
—I now find, but too late, how much
I have been imposed upon. —Did you
not assure me,” continued he, somewhat
more mildly, “that you were free
from all incumbrances but that girl, 
whom, since our marriage, I have tendered
as my own?” —And then perceiving
she answered nothing, but looked
pale and trembled, he repeated to her the
affront he had received, “which,” said
he, “in all my dealings in the world,
would never have happened, but on
your account.” 
Though lady Mellasin had as much artifice,
and the power of dissimulation, as
any of her sex, yet she was at a loss thus
taken unprepared.—she hesitated,—she
stammered, and fain would have denied
the having given any such bond; but
finding the proofs too plain against her,
she threw herself at his feet,—wept, and
conjured him to forgive the only deception
she had practised on him: —“It
was a debt,’ said she, “contracted by
my former husband, which I knew not
of. —I thought the effects he left behind
him were more than sufficient to
have discharged whatever obligations
he lay under, and foolishly took out
letters of adminstration. —The demand
of Marplus came not upon me till some
time after,—I then inconsiderately
gave him my own bond, which he
however promised not to put in force
without previously acquainting me.” 
This excuse was too weak, as well as
all the affection mr. Goodman had for
her, to pacify the emotions of his just indignation. 
—“And pray,” cried he, in a
voice divided between scorn and anger,
“of what advantage would it have been
to me your being previously acquainted
with it? —Could you have paid the
money without robbing, or defrauding
me? —No, madam,” continued he,
I shall for the future give credit to nothing
you can say, and as I cannot be
assured that this is the only misfortune
I have to dread on your account, shall
consider what steps I ought to take for
my defence.” 
In speaking these words he rung the
bell for a servant, and ordered that bed,
to which he had invited mr. Thoughtless,
should that instant be made ready for
himself. —All the tears and intreaties of
lady Mellasin were in vain, to make him
recede from his resolution of lying alone
that night; and as soon as he was told
his orders were obeyed, he flung out of
the room, saying,—“Madam, perhaps,
we never more may meet between a
pair of sheets.” —Whether at that
time he was determined to carry his resentment
so far, or not, is uncertain, but 
what happened very shortly after, left
him no other part to take, than that
which he had threatened. 