

Is somewhat more explicit than the former. 
The persons who had surprised our lovers in the midst of the most interesting discourse they ever yet had entertain'd each other with, were two young ladies of Jenny's intimate acquaintance;—they had been driven out of the park by a shower of rain, and could not go home without calling on her, to communicate something which they thought would be equally diverting to her as it had been to themselves. 
On seeing Jemmy with her,—‘We have catch'd you alone together, said one of them, and it is happy for you that you have been so, as nothing but the pleasure of each other's company, could have attoned for what you have lost by not being in the mall to-night. 
‘As how pray?—demanded she. —Lady Fisk,—resumed the other,—Oh, such fleering,—such pointing,—such an universal titter as soon as ever she appear'd! —Lady Fisk,—cried Jemmy, interrupting her,—I am afraid, madam, your intelligence is stale,—that lady has play'd over all her tricks long ago, and can do nothing new for us to laugh at. 
‘You are quite mistaken, I assure you, answer'd she;—she has now, as Colly says, outdone all her usual outdoings, as you will be obliged to confess when you have heard the story. 
‘What, cried he,—can any thing go beyond her adventure in Covent-Garden,—where she went in men's cloaths,—pick'd up a woman of the town, and was severely beaten by her on the discovery of her sex? 
‘Or what happened to her at Bartholomew-Fair,—said Jenny,—where being a little too pert with some young apprentices, who had attack'd her as a lady of pleasure, a riot ensued, and she was glad to produce her seal with the coat of arms upon it, and a letter she had received that day from her lord, to prevent being lodg'd that night in the watch-house, and carried before the sitting alderman next morning. 
‘Neither of these exploits,’—reply'd the lady that had spoke first,—comes up to what we have to tell you, or gave her half the mortification;—it would be the first story in the world if one could but find out the beginning;—but the misfortune is, that nothing but the catastrophe as yet is come to light. 
‘It is but half a story then, at best, said Jemmy laughing;—but let us hear it however. —I should not have kept you so long in suspence my dear, if this thing here,—cried she, giving Jemmy a slap on the shoulder with her fan,—had not interrupted me;—you must know, that some night last week lord and lady Fisk had a most terrible quarrel,—they were just going into bed,—she was undress'd all but her under petticoat;—what she said or did to provoke him to such wrath Heaven knows; but he push'd her out of the chamber,—drove her down stairs, and in that condition turn'd her into the street, charging the porter not to open the door on any account. 
‘Never was the pride and spirit of any lady so humbled as her's,—continued this talkative lady;—after finding that knocking and calling loud was to no effect, she condescended to put her mouth close to the key-hole of the door, and beseech the porter, in the most submissive terms, to let her in, though it were no farther than the hall; while her remorseless lord looked through the window, and insulting her distress, told her it was a fine night, and that it was good for her ladyship's health to be thus alfresco. 
‘After having had his fill of laughter at the miserable plight to which she was reduced, he consented to her admittance;—she was no sooner within the doors than she flew up stairs;—the dispute between them was renewed with almost the same vehemence as before;—he loaded her with a thousand foul names;—she, in return, called him toad,—devil, and every thing her passion could suggest;—till having both rail'd themselves out of breath, they agreed to go into bed together, in order to finish the quarrel. 
‘But now comes the jest,—went she on,—How long a time do you think it took up to compose this difference? why no less than three whole days and nights successively; during all which space the chamber door was never opened, but to take in some refreshment, which was placed for them in the next room: this evening was the first of their appearance since their resurrection from the sepulchre of down; my lord received such congratulations upon it as made him glad to quit the park; but her ladyship, having somewhat more assurance, stay'd till the change of weather obliged her, as well as ourselves, to take shelter in our chairs. 
‘I cannot help confessing,—said Jemmy, but that there is somewhat pretty extraordinary in this affair, and also that one of them has a greater share of complaisance than I suspected; since it is plain that which ever of them was in fault the other did equal penance.’ 
A good deal of pleasantry passed on this adventure, during the whole time the ladies stayed, which indeed was not very long;—they had here opened their pacquet, and were upon the wing to carry it to those other of their acquaintance to whom they thought it might be equally new and agreeable. 
The ladies had no sooner taken their leave, than Jenny began to animadvert, with more strength of reason than could have been expected from a person of her years, on the ridiculous fact they had been relating;—‘You hear, Jemmy said she, what unaccountable things married people are sometimes guilty of;—instead of living together in a mutual harmony, it seems methinks as if they took a kind of pleasure in making each other wretched;—and sure they must do so, or they would not thus expose themselves to the contempt of the world, and become the jest even of their own servants, who must necessarily be the first witnesses of their folly. 
‘We ought not, however, replied he, to lay on marriage the blame of all those preposterous things we see acted in that state, by persons we have been speaking of;—because long before their enterance into it, both of them behaved in such a manner as to shew they were wholly govern'd by caprice, and not by that farcical passion which many people are possessed of, in a more or less degree, for making a great noise, and being talked of in the world, tho' it is only for foibles, which one would think they should rather labour to conceal. 
‘But I must own, continued he, that I have sometimes been very much surprised at the little concord I have observed between persons whose principles, humours, and behaviour, in the general, would make one imagine them equally qualified to give each other perfect happiness. 
‘What you say is extremely just, cried Jenny, and I have often had occasion to make the same reflections;—it follows then, that every one before they engage in marriage should be well vers'd in all those things, whatever they are, which constitute the happiness of it;—this town is an ample school, and both of us have acquaintance enough in it to learn, from the mistakes of others, how to regulate our own conduct and passions, so as not to be laugh'd at ourselves for what we laugh at in them. 
‘Spoke like a philosophoress, rejoined Jemmy; and upon second thoughts I agree with you, that as every thing is ready for us, and we can marry when we will, it will be best for us both to stay till we have got some farther lights into the mysterious duties of the conjugal union.’ 
Jenny, who as yet had not the least inclination to enter into the serious road of matrimony, and would have been equally loath to have appear'd too refractory, if he had insisted on the performance of the covenant made between their fathers, was quite transported to find his sentiments so conformable to her own on this head; but forbore testifying all the satisfaction she felt, for fear of making him call in question the sincerity of her affection for him. 
She only told him, that she was certain it would be for their mutual interest to do as he had mentioned;—on which he pursued his discourse in these terms: 
‘But, my dear Jenny, said he, as learning will not come of itself, and we should be equally perfect in the different parts we are to act together hereafter; suppose we should resolve to communicate to each other all the discoveries we are able to make, among the several families that either of us converse with, and also all the confidences which are reposed in us;—by this means I shall be acquainted with all the humours of your sex, and you no stranger to those of mine; so that neither of us will be at a loss to bear with the foibles which nature or custom may have implanted in the other; besides, added he, this is no more than practising before-hand one of those points, which, as I take it, is very essential to the happiness of both a husband and a wife,—which is the having no reserve.’ 
‘I am charm'd with your project, answer'd she; but then each of us must be sure to preserve an inviolable secrecy in what has been imparted by the other, which is another main essential towards conjugal felicity.’ 
Jemmy having assured her, that whatever she said to him on this account should be no more than talking to her own heart, they were beginning to divert themselves with the idea of the many whimsical passages they should have to recite to each other, when a footman brought a letter to Jenny,—the contents whereof were as follow: 
To miss Jessamy.
Dear creature,
“If this finds you at home and disengaged, I flatter myself you will immediately comply with the request it contains;—I am now alone, and in a situation which requires both consolation and advice, neither of which I can hope for more effectually than from the friendship with which you favour me;—I would have waited on you, but am prevented by reasons which you will be no stranger to on seeing me. I am, 
“with the most perfect amity,
my dear miss Jessamy,
yours, &c.E. Marlove. 
“P. S. If I am unhappily deprived of your company to-night, I beg you will not fail coming as early as possible in the morning; for I am all impatience to let you into the history of my misfortunes.” 

‘See here,—said she, giving the letter to Jemmy,—‘fortune already is likely to present me with something that may be worth your knowledge;—the lady who writes in this manner has honour and virtue;—she has been but four months married to a gentleman whom she preferred to a great number of other admirers, and who seems passionately fond of her;—you will not wonder that I am in as much haste to hear the occasion of her complaint, as she is to tell it me.’ 
She then ordered a chair to the door, and calling for her gloves and capuchin, hurried them on while he was reading; the motive which carry'd her away was too agreeable for him to offer to detain her; and they parted without farther ceremony than a kiss, and good night. 
