


May be called, an appendix to the former,
as it contains only some passages
subsequent to the preceeding occurrences. 

What pain soever the good nature
and generosity of mr. Trueworth
had made him suffer, at sight of the unfortunate
miss Flora's distress, it was dissipated
by recalling to his mind the pleasing
idea sir Bazil had inspired in him, of
succeeding in his wishes with the amiable
miss Harriot. 
What sleep he had that night, doubtless,
presented him with nothing but the
delightful images of approaching joys,
and, possibly, might give him some intimation
of what was in those moments
doing for him, by those who were waking
for his interest. 
Mrs. Wellair, who was extremely cautious
how she undertook any thing, without
being fully convinced it was right,
and no less industrious in accomplishing 

whatever she had once undertook, had
employed all the time she had, with her
sister before dinner, in representing to her,
in the most pathetic terms, the passion
mr. Trueworth had for her,—the extraordinary
merits he was possessed of, and
the many advantages of an alliance with
him; but miss Harriot was modest to
that excess, that to be told, though from
the mouth of a sister, she had inspired
any inclinations of the sort she mentioned,
gave her the utmost confusion;—she had
not considered the differences of sexes, and
could not hear that any thing in her had
reminded others of it, without blushing:
—the effects of her beauty gave her rather
a painful than a pleasing sensation,
and she was ready to die with shame at
what the most part of women are studious
to acquire, and look on as their
greatest glory. 
She offered nothing, however, in opposition
to what mrs. Wellair had said,
concerning the person, or amiable qualities
of mr. Trueworth; neither indeed
had she a will to do it;—she had been
always highly pleased with his conversation,
and had treated him with the same
innocent freedom she did her brother, and
she was now afraid, that it was her behaving
to him in this manner, that had 

encouraged him to think of making his
addresses to her as a lover;—she looked
back with regret on every little mark of
favour she had shewn him, lest he should
have construed them into a meaning,
which was far distant from her thoughts; 
and these reflections it was, that occasioned
that unusual pensiveness, which sir Bazil
had observed in her at dinner, and
which had given him some apprehensions
proceeded from a cause less favourable to
his friend. 
Mrs. Wellair was not at all discouraged
by the manner in which her sister had
listened to this overture;—she knew that
several proposals of the same nature had
been made to her in the country, all
which she had rejected, and rejected with
a disdain:—a certain air of abhorrence,
widely different to what she testified on
account of mr Trueworth; and this prudent
lady rightly judged, that he had
little else to combat with, than the over-bashfulness
of his mistress. 
At night, on going to bed, she renewed
the discourse, and pursued the theme
she had began, with such success, that she
brought miss Harriot to confess, she
believed there was no man more deserving
to be loved than mr. Trueworth;— 

‘but, my dear sister,’ said she, ‘I have
no inclination to marry, nor to leave
you; I am quite happy as I am, and
desire to be no more so:’ to which the
other replied, that was childish talking,— 
that she would, doubtless, marry some
time or other,—that she might, perhaps,
never have so good an offer, and
could not possibly have a better, therefore
advised her, not to slip the present
opportunity, but whenever mr. Trueworth
should make a declaration of his
passion to herself, to receive it in such a
manner, as should not give him any room
to imagine she was utterly averse to his
pretensions. 
Miss Harriot suffered her to urge her
on this point for a considerable time, but
at last replied, in a low and hesitating
voice, that she would be guided by her
friends, who she was perfectly convinced
had her interest at heart, and knew much
better than herself what conduct she ought
to observe: to which mrs. Wellair replied,
that she doubted not but the end would
abundantly justify the advice had been
given her. 
The first thing this lady did in the
morning, was to go to her brother's
chamber, and acquaint him with all that 

had passed between herself and miss Harriot; 
after which they agreed together,
that mr. Trueworth should have an opportunity
that very day of making his
addresses to her. 
Though sir Bazil thought it needless to
add any thing to what was already done,
yet he could not forbear taking an occasion,
when they were at breakfast, to
mention mr. Trueworth's name, and the
many good qualities he was possessed of. 
—Mrs. Wellair joined in the praises her
brother gave him, but miss Harriot spoke
not a word:—on which, ‘Are you not
of our opinion, sister?’ cried he to her. 
—‘Yes, brother,’ answered she, ‘mr.
Trueworth is certainly a very fine gentleman.’ 
—‘How cold is such an expression,’ 
resumed sir Bazil, ‘and even
that extorted?’ —‘You would not
sure, sir,’ said she, a little gaily, ‘have
me in raptures about him, and speak
as if I were in love with him?’ 
‘Indeed but I would,’ cried sir Bazil; 
‘and, what is more, would also have
you be so;—he deserves it from you,
and as you must some time or other
be sensible of the tender passion, you
cannot do it at more suitable years.—’ 

‘I see no necessity,’ replied she, ‘for
my being so at any years.’ 
‘It is a sign then,’ said he, ‘that you
have not consulted nature;—have you
never read what lord Lansdown has
wrote upon this subject?—if you have
not, I will repeat it to you, 

“In vain from fate we strive to fly,
“For first or last, as all must die,
“So 'tis decreed by those above,
“That first or last, we all must love.’

‘Poets are not always prophets,’ answered
she, laughing. —‘It depends
upon mr. Trueworth himself,’ said sir
Bazil, ‘to prevent you from giving the
lie to the prediction;—if he fails, I
shall believe no other man in the world
will ever have the power to engage you
to fulfil it;—he dines here to day;— 
sister Wellair and I are obliged to go
abroad in the afternoon, so must desire
you to make tea, and entertain him as
well as you can, 'till we come back.’ 
‘I see you are both in the plot against
me,’ cried she; ‘but I shall endeavour
to behave so as not to affront your
guest, yet at the same time be far from
making good your oracle.’ 

A gentleman coming in to sir Bazil,
broke off their discourse, and relieved
miss Harriot from any farther persecution
at this time. —It was not that she disliked
either the person or conversation of mr.
Trueworth, or that she was tired with
the praises given him by her brother and
sister;—on the contrary, she found a
thousand things, which they had not
mentioned, to admire in him:—in fine,
he was, in reality, less indifferent to her,
than she herself imagined, but there was
a certain shyness in her disposition, which
mingled some share of pain with the
pleasure of hearing him spoke of as her
lover. 
She was sensible this propensity, which
nature had implanted, was a weakness in
her; but though she used her utmost efforts
for overcoming it,—she found herself
unequal to the task:—in vain she
considered, that the addresses of a man
of such perfect honour and politeness, as
mr. Trueworth, could not but be accompanied
with the most profound respect:
—in vain she called to mind the example
of other ladies, whom she had seen behave
in the company of those, who professed
themselves their lovers, with the
greatest ease and sprightliness, the very 

sight of mr. Trueworth, as she saw him
from her chamber window, talking with
her brother in the garden, threw her
heart into palpitations, which all the reason
she was mistress of, could not enable
her to quiet; but when obliged to go
down and sit with him at table, her confusion
increased, by being more near the
object which occasioned it;—she endeavoured
to treat him with the same freedom
she had been accustomed, but it
was not in her power:—in fine, never
woman suffered more, in constraining herself
to be silent and demure, than she
did, in constraining herself to be talkative
and gay. 
What then became of her, when sir
Bazil and mrs. Wellair, after making a
formal excuse for a short absence, went
out, and left her exposed to the sollicitations
of a passion, which her timid modesty
had made her so much dread? 
The moment mr. Trueworth saw himself
alone with her, he approached her
with the most tender and respectful air,
—‘How often, madam, have I languished
for an opportunity, such as this,
of telling you how much my soul adores
you! —My dear friend, sir Bazil, has
assured me he has prepared you to forgive 

give the boldness of my flame, and
that for his sake you will vouchsafe to
listen to my vows; but it is from myself
alone you can be convinced of the
ardency of the love you have inspired.’ 
‘My brother, sir,’ answered she, blushing,
‘has indeed informed me, that
I have obligations to you of a nature,
which I was as far from expecting,
as I am from deserving.’ —Here
mr. Trueworth began to run into some
praises on the charms which had subdued
his heart, which, though no more than
dictated by his real sentiments, seemed
to her too extravagant, and beyond what
her modesty would suffer her to endure:
‘Hold, sir,’ cried she, interrupting him,
‘if you would have me believe your professions
are sincere, forbear, I beseech
you, to talk to me in this manner:— 
it is an ill-judged policy, methinks, in
you men, to idolize the women too
much, you wish would think well of
you;—if our sex are in reality so vain
as you generally represent us, on whom
but yourselves can the fault be laid? — 
And if we prove so weak as to imagine
ourselves such, as either the flattery, or
the partial affection of the lover paints
us, we shall be apt to take every thing
as our due, and think little gratitude 

is owing, for the offering he makes us
of his heart.’ 
Mr. Trueworth was perfectly ravished
at hearing her speak thus, but durst not
express himself with too much warmth on
the occasion:—‘It must be confessed,
madam,’ replied he, ‘that the beauties
of the person, when not accompanied
by those of the mind, afford but a short
liv'd triumph to the fair possessor;— 
they dazzle at first sight, and take the
senses as it were by surprise; but the
impression soon wears off, and the captivated
heart regains its former liberty,
—nay, perhaps, wonders at itself for
having been enslaved:—whereas those
darts, which fly from the perfections of
the mind, penetrate into the soul, and
fix a lasting empire there;—but when
both these charms shall happen to be
united, as in the lovely Harriot,’ continued
he, taking one of her hands and
kissing it;—‘When in the most enchanting
form that nature ever made,
is found a soul enriched with every virtue,
—every grace,—how indissoluble
is the chain!—how glorious the bondage!’ 
‘Love is a theme I have never made
my study,’ answered she; ‘but according 

to my notions of the matter, those
gentlemen, who pretend to be affected
by it, give themselves more trouble than
they need,—as that passion is generally
allowed rather to be the child of fancy,
than of real merit in the object loved,
I should think it would be sufficient for
any man in his addresses to a lady, to
tell her, that she happens to hit his
taste,—that she is what he likes, without
dressing her up in qualities, which,
perhaps, have no existence but in his
own imagination.’ 
‘Where love is founded on beauty
alone, as I have already said,’ resumed
mr. Trueworth, ‘the instructions you
give, madam, of the manner of declaring
it, is certainly very just; for, indeed,
no farther could be warranted by
sincerity:—but where reason directs
the lover's choice, and points out those
excellencies which alone can make him
happy in the possession of his wishes,
ideas more sublime will naturally arise,
and we can never too much admire,
or praise, what is immediately from the
Divine Source of all perfection! —It is
not, O charming Harriot!’ pursued he,
looking on her with the utmost tenderness; 
—‘it is not those radiant eyes;— 
that lovely mouth, nor that sweet majesty 

that shines through all your air,
but it is the heaven within that I adore; 
—to that I pay my present worship,
and on that build all my hopes of future
bliss!’ 
Miss Harriot was about to make some
reply, but his looks, the vehemence with
which he uttered these last words, and
the passionate gesture which accompanied
them, made her relapse into her former
bashfulness, from which she had a little
recovered herself, and again deprived her
of the power of speech. 
‘You give up the point then my angel,’ 
cried he, perceiving she was silent, ‘and
I am glad you do; for had you continued
to prohibit my expatiating on
these merits, which made me your
adorer, I must have maintained the argument
even against your lovely self,
to whom I shall for ever yield in all
things else.’ 
After this he fell, insensibly as it were,
into some discourse concerning the divine
ordinance of marriage, and then proceeded
to give her the most amiable picture,
that words could form of that state, when
two persons of virtue, honour, and good
sense, were by love and law united, and 

found themselves equally bound by duty
and inclination, to make each other's
happiness. 
There are some ladies, who listen very
contentedly to the most warm and amorous
addresses can be made to them, yet
will not suffer the least word of marriage,
till after a long and tedious preparation
is made for a sound, which they pretend
to think so dreadful. —These no doubt
will say, that mr. Trueworth went too
far for a lover, on the first declaration
of his passion; but he was emboldened to
act in the manner he did, by the brother
of his mistress, and had the satisfaction
to perceive she was not offended at it;— 
she had a great share of solid understanding,
—was an enemy to all sorts of affectation,
and as she knew the end proposed
by his courtship was marriage, saw
no reason why he should be fearful of
mentioning it to her; and though her
modesty would not permit her to take
much part in a conversation of this nature,
yet she was too artless, and indeed
too sincere, to counterfeit a displeasure,
which she did not feel. 
