



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, May 29. 
Now have I established myself for ever in my
Charmer's heart. 
The Captain came at Seven, as promised, and ready
equipped for his journey. My Beloved chose not to
give us her company till our first conversation was
over—Ashamed, I suppose, to be present at that part
of it, which was to restore her to her Virgin State by
my confession, after her Wifehood had been reported
to her Uncle. But she took her cue nevertheless,
and listened to all that passed. 
The modestest women, Jack, must think, and
think deeply sometimes. I wonder whether they ever
blush at those things by themselves, at which they
have so charming a knack of blushing in company. 
If not; and if blushing be a sign of grace or modesty; 
have not the Sex as great a command over their
Blushes, as they are said to have over their Tears? 
This reflection would lead me a great way into female
minds, were I disposed to pursue it. 
I told the Captain, that I would prevent his question; 
and accordingly (after I had enjoined the strictest
secrecy, that no advantage might be given to
James Harlowe; and which he answered for as well
on Mr. Harlowe's part as his own) I acknowleged
nakedly and fairly the whole truth—To wit, ‘That
we were not yet married. I gave him hints of the
causes of procrastination. Some of them owing to
unhappy misunderstandings: But chiefly to the
Lady's desire of previous Reconciliation with her
friends; and to a delicacy that had no example.’ 
Less nice Ladies than this, Jack, love to have delays,
wilful and studied delays, imputed to them in these
cases—Yet are indelicate in their affected delicacy; 

for do they not thereby tacitly confess, that they expect
to be the greatest gainers in wedlock; and
that there is self-denial in the pride they take in delaying? 
‘I told him the reason of our passing to the people
below as married—Yet as under a vow of restriction,
as to Consummation, which had kept us
both to the height, one of forbearing, the other of
vigilant punctilio; even to the denial of those innocent
freedoms, which betrothed Lovers never
scruple to allow and to take. 
‘I then communicated to him a copy of my proposals
of Settlement; the substance of her written
answer; the contents of my Letter of invitation to
Lord M. to be her Nuptial-father; and of my
Lord's generous reply. But said, that having apprehensions
of delay from his infirmities, and my
Beloved chusing by all means (and that from principles
of unrequited duty) a private Solemnization,
I had written to excuse his Lordship's presence; 
and expected an answer every hour. 
‘The Settlements, I told him, were actually
drawing by Counsellor Williams, of whose eminence
he must have heard—’ 
He had. 
‘And of the truth of this he might satisfy himself
before he went out of town. 
‘When these were drawn, approved, and engrossed,
nothing, I said, but signing, and the nomination
of my happy day, would be wanting. I
had a pride, I declared, in doing the highest justice,
to so beloved a creature, of my own voluntary motion,
and without the intervention of a family from
whom I had received the greatest insults. And
this being our present situation, I was contented
that Mr. John Harlowe should suspend his reconciliatory
purposes till our marriage were actually
solemnized.’ 

The Captain was highly delighted with all I said: 
Yet owned, that as his dear friend Mr. Harlowe had
expressed himself greatly pleased to hear that we were
actually married, he could have wished it had been so. 
But, nevertheless, he doubted not that all would be
well. 
He saw my reasons, he said, and approved of them,
for making the gentlewomen below [whom again he
understood to be good sort of people] believe, that the
Ceremony had passed; which so well accounted for
what the Lady's maid had told Mr. Harlowe's friend. 
Mr. James Harlowe, he said, had certainly ends to
answer in keeping open the breach; and as certainly
had formed a design to get his Sister out of my hands. 
Wherefore it as much imported his worthy friend to
keep this treaty a secret, as it did me; at least till
he had formed his party, and taken his measures. 
Ill-will and passion were dreadful misrepresenters. It
was amazing to him, that animosity could be carried
so high against a man capable of-views so pacific and
so honourable, and who had shewn such a command
of his temper, in this whole transaction, as I had
done. Generosity, indeed, in every case, where
love of stratagem and intrigue (I would excuse him)
were not concerned, was a part of my character— 
He was proceeding, when breakfast being ready,
in came the Empress of my heart, irradiating all
around her, as with a glory—A benignity and graciousness
in her aspect, that, tho' natural to it, had
been long banished from it. 
Next to prostration lowly bowed the Captain. O
how the sweet creature smiled her approbation of
him! Reverence from one, begets reverence from
another. Men are more of monkeys in imitation,
than they think themselves—Involuntarily, in a manner,
I bent my knee—My dearest life—and made a
very fine speech on presenting the Captain to her. 
No title, myself, to her lip or cheek, 'tis well he 

attempted not either. He was indeed ready to worship
her;—could only touch her charming hand. 
I have told the Captain, my dear creature—And
then I briefly repeated (as if I had supposed she had
not heard it) all I had told him. 
He was astonished, that any-body could be displeased
one moment with such an angel. He undertook
her cause as the highest degree of merit to
himself. 
Never, I must needs say, did the angel so much
look the angel. All placid, serene, smiling, self-assured: 
A more lovely flush than usual heightening
her natural graces, and adding charms, even to radiance,
to her charming complexion. 
After we had seated ourselves, the agreeable subject
was renewed, as we took our chocolate. How
happy should she be in her Uncle's restored favour! 
The Captain engaged for it—No more delays, he
hoped, on her part! Let the happy day be but once
over, all would then be right. But was it improper
to ask for copies of my proposals, and of her answer,
in order to shew them to his dear friend her Uncle? 
As Mr. Lovelace pleased—O that the dear creature
would always say so! 
It must be in strict confidence then, I said. But
would it not be better to shew her Uncle the draught
of the Settlements, when drawn? 
And will you be so good, as to allow of this, Mr.
Lovelace? 
There, Belford! We were once The Quarrelsome,
but now we are The Polite, Lovers. 
Indeed, my dearest creature, I will, if you desire
it; and if Captain Tomlinson will engage, that Mr.
Harlowe shall keep them absolutely a Secret; that I
may not be subjected to the cavil and controul of any
others of a family that have used me so very ill. 
New indeed, Sir, you are very obliging. 

Dost think, Jack, that my face did not now also
shine? 
I held out my hand (first consecrating it with a
kiss) for hers. She condescended to give it me. I pressed
it to my lips: You know not, Captain Tomlinson
(with an air) all storms overblown, what a happy
man— 
Charming couple! [His hands lifted up] How will
my good friend rejoice! O that he were present! 
You know not, Madam, how dear you still are to
your Uncle Harlowe!— 
I am unhappy ever to have disobliged him! 
Not too much of that, however, fairest, thought I! 
The Captain repeated his resolutions of service, and
that in so acceptable a manner, that the dear creature
wished, that neither he, nor any of his, might ever
want a friend of equal benevolence. 
Nor any of His, she said; for the Captain brought
it in, that he had five children living, by one of the
best of wives and mothers, whose excellent management
made him as happy, as if his Eight hundred
pounds a year (which was all he had to boast of) were
Two thousand. 
Without Oeconomy, the oraculous Lady said, no
Estate was large enough. With it, the least was not
too small. 
Lie still, teazing villain! lie still! —I was only
speaking to my Conscience, Jack. 
And let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, said the Captain; 
yet not so much from doubt, as that I may
proceed upon sure grounds—You are willing to cooperate
with my dear friend in a general Reconciliation? 
Let me tell you, Mr. Tomlinson, that if it can be
distinguished, that my readiness to make up with a
family, of whose generosity I have not had reason to
think highly, is entirely owing to the value I have
for this angel of a woman, I will not only co-operate 

with Mr. John Harlowe, as you ask; but I will meet
Mr. James Harlowe senior, and his Lady, all the way. 
And furthermore, to make the Son James and his
Sister Arabella quite easy, I will absolutely disclaim
any further interest, whether living or dying, in any
of the three Brothers Estates; contenting myself
with what my Beloved's Grandfather has bequeathed
to her: For I have reason to be abundantly satisfied
with my own circumstances and prospects—Enough
rewarded, were she not to bring a shilling in dowry,
in a woman who has a merit superior to all the goods
of fortune. —True as the Gospel, Belford! —Why
had not this Scene a real foundation! 
The dear creature, by her eyes, expressed her gratitude,
before her lips could utter it. O Mr. Lovelace,
said she—You have infinitely—And there she
stopt. 
The Captain run over in my praise. He was really
affected. 
O that I had not such a mixture of Revenge and
Pride in my Love, thought I! —But (my old plea)
cannot I make her amends at any time? And is not
her virtue now in the height of its probation? — 
Would she lay aside, like the friends of my uncontending
Rosebud, all thoughts of defiance—Would
she throw herself upon my mercy, and try me but
one fortnight in the Life of Honour—What then? — 
I cannot say, What then.— 
Do not despise me, Jack, for my inconsistency— 
In no two Letters perhaps agreeing with myself—Who
expects consistency in men of our character? —But I
am mad with Love—Fired by Revenge—Puzzled
with my own devices—My Invention is my curse— 
My Pride my punishment—Drawn five or six ways
at once, can she possibly be so unhappy as I? —O
why, why, was this woman so divinely excellent! — 
Yet how know I that she is? What have been her
trials? Have I had the courage to make a single one 

upon her person, tho' a thousand upon her temper? — 
Enow, I hope, to make her afraid of ever disobliging
me more!— 
* *
I must banish Reflection, or I am a lost man. 
For these two hours past have I hated myself for my
own contrivances. And this not only from what I
have related to thee; but from what I have further
to relate. But I have now once more steeled my
heart. My Vengeance is uppermost; for I have been
re-perusing some of Miss Howe's virulence. The contempt
they have both held me in, I cannot bear— 
The happiest breakfast-time, my Beloved owned,
that she had ever known since she had left her Father's
house [She might have let this alone]. The Captain
renewed all his protestations of service. He would
write me word how his dear friend received the account
he should give him of the happy situation of
our affairs, and what he thought of the Settlements,
as soon as I should send him the Draughts so kindly
promised. And we parted with great professions of
mutual esteem; my Beloved putting up vows for the
success of his generous mediation. 
When I returned from attending the Captain down
stairs, which I did to the outward door, my Beloved
met me as I entered the Dining-room; complacencey
reigning in every lovely feature. 
‘You see me already, said she, another creature. 
You know not, Mr. Lovelace, how near my heart
this hoped-for Reconciliation is. I am now willing
to banish every disagreeable remembrance. You
know not, Sir, how much you have obliged me. 
And Oh, Mr. Lovelace, how happy shall I be,
when my heart is lightened from the all-sinking
weight of a Father's Curse! When my dear
Mamma [You don't know, Sir, half the excellencies
of my dear Mamma! and what a kind heart
she has, when it is left to follow its own impulses 

—When this blessed Mamma] shall once more fold
me to her indulgent bosom! When I shall again
have Uncles and Aunts, and a Brother and Sister,
all striving who shall shew most kindness and favour
to the poor outcast, then no more an outcast! —And
you, Mr. Lovelace, to behold all this, and to be
received into a family so dear to me, with welcome
—What tho' a little cold at first? when they
come to know you better, and to see you oftener,
no fresh causes of disgust occurring, and you, as I
hope, having entered upon a new course, all will
be warmer and warmer Love on both sides, till
every one perhaps will wonder, how they came to
set themselves against you.’ 
Then drying her tears with her handkerchief, after
a few moments pausing, on a sudden; as if recollecting
that she had been led by her joy to an expression
of it which she had not intended I should see,
she retired to her chamber with precipitation; leaving
me almost as unable to stand it, as herself. 
In short, I was—I want words to say how I was— 
My nose had been made to tingle before; my eyes
have before been made to glisten by this soul-moving
Beauty; but so very much affected, I never was— 
for, trying to check my sensibility, it was too strong
for me, and I even sobbed—Yes, by my soul, I
audibly sobbed, and was forced to turn from her before
she had well finished her affecting speech. 
I want, methinks, now I have owned the odd sensation,
to describe it to thee—The thing was so
strange to me—Something choaking, as it were, in
my throat—I know not how—Yet, I must needs say,
tho' I am out of countenance upon the recollection,
that there was something very pretty in it; and I
wish I could know it again, that I might have a
more perfect idea of it, and be better able to describe
it to thee. 
But this effect of her joy on such an occasion gives 

me a high notion of what that Virtue must be [What
other name can I call it?] which in a mind so capable
of delicate transport, should be able to make so charming
a creature, in her very bloom, all frost and snow
to every advance of Love from the man she hates not. 
This must be all from Education too—Must it not,
Belford? Can Education have stronger force in a woman's
heart than Nature? —Sure it cannot. But if
it can, how entirely right are Parents to cultivate
their Daughters Minds, and to inspire them with notions
of Reserve and Distance to our Sex; and indeed
to make them think highly of their own! For
Pride is an excellent Substitute, let me tell thee,
where Virtue shines not out, as the Sun, in its own
unborrowed Lustre. 