


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday Night. 
Some amusement, my Lucy, the day has afforded:
Indeed more than I could have wished. A
large pacquet, however, for Selby-House. 
Lady Betty received us most politely. She had
company with her, to whom she introduced us, and
presented me in a very advantageous character. 
Shall I tell you how their first appearance struck me,
and what I have since heard and observed of them? 

The first I shall mention was Miss Cantillon; very
pretty; but visibly proud, affected, and conceited. 
The second Miss Clements; plain; but of a fine
understanding, improved by reading; and who having
no personal advantages to be vain of, has, by the
cultivation of her mind, obtained a preference in
every one's opinion over the fair Cantillon. 
The third was Miss Barnevelt, a lady of masculine
features, and whose mind bely'd not those features; 
for she has the character of being loud, bold, free,
even fierce when opposed; and affects at all times such
airs of contempt of her own sex, that one almost
wonders at her condescending to wear petticoats. 
The gentlemens names were Walden and Singleton; 
the first, an Oxford scholar of family and fortune; 
but quaint and opinionated, despising every
one who has not had the benefit of an University
education. 
Mr. Singleton is an harmless man; who is, it
seems, the object of more ridicule, even down to his
very name, among all his acquaintance, than I think
he by any means ought, considering the apparent inoffensiveness
of the man, who did not give himself
his intellects; and his constant good humour, which
might intitle him to better quarter; the rather too as
he has one point of knowlege, which those who think
themselves his superiors in understanding, do not always
attain, the knowlege of himself; for he is humble,
modest, ready to confess an inferiority to every
one: And as laughing at a jest is by some taken for
high applause, he is ever the first to bestow that commendation
on what others say; tho' it must be owned,
he now-and-then mistakes for a jest what is none:
Which, however, may be generally more the fault of
the speakers than of Mr. Singleton; since he takes
his cue from their smiles, especially when those are
seconded by the laugh of one of whom he has a good
opinion. 

Mr. Singleton is in possession of a good estate,
which makes amends for many defects: He has a
turn, it is said, to the well-managing of it; and nobody
understands his own interest better than he; by
which knowlege, he has opportunities to lay obligations
upon many of those, who behind his back
think themselves intitled by their supposed superior
sense to deride him: And he is ready enough to oblige
in this way: But it is always on such securities,
that he has never given cause for spendthrifts to laugh
at him on that account. 
It is thought that the friends of the fair Cantillon
would not be averse to an alliance with this gentleman:
While I, were I his Sister, should rather wish, that
he had so much wisdom in his weakness, as to devote
himself to the worthier Pulcheria Clements (Lady
Betty's wish as well as mine) whose fortune, tho' not
despicable, and whose humbler views, would make
her think herself repaid the obligation she would lay
him under by her acceptance of him. 
No-body, it seems, thinks of an husband for Miss
Barnevelt. She is sneeringly spoken of rather as a
young fellow, than as a woman; and who will one
day look out for a wife for herself. One reason indeed,
she every-where gives, for being satisfied with
being a woman; which is, that she cannot be married
to a woman. 
An odd creature, my dear. But see what women
get by going out of character. Like the Bats in the
fable, they are look'd upon as mortals of a doubtful
species, hardly owned by either, and laugh'd at by
both. 
This was the company, and all the company besides
us, that Lady Betty expected. But mutual civilities
had hardly passed, when Lady Betty, having
been called out, return'd, introducing, as a gentleman,
who would be acceptable to every one, Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen. He is, whisper'd she to me, as he 

saluted the rest of the company, in a very gallant
manner, a young Baronet of a very large estate, the
greatest part of which has lately come to him by the
death of a Grandmother, and two Uncles, all very
rich. 
When he was presented to me, by name, and I to
him, this was his speech: And are at last my eyes
bless'd with the sight of a young Lady so celebrated
for her graces of person and mind? Much did I hear,
when I was at the last Northampton races, of Miss
Byron: But little did I expect to find report fall so
short of what I see. 
Miss Cantillon bridled, play'd with her fan, and
look'd as if she thought herself slighted; a little scorn
intermingled with the airs she gave herself. 
Miss Clements smiled, and look'd pleased, as if she
enjoyed, good-naturedly, a compliment made to one
of the sex which she adorns by the goodness of her
heart. 
Miss Barnevelt said, she had from the moment I
first enter'd beheld me with the eye of a Lover. And
freely taking my hand, squeezed it. —Charming creature!
said she, as if addressing a country innocent,
and perhaps expecting me to cover'd with blushes and
confusion. 
The Baronet, excusing himself to Lady Betty,
assured her, that she must place this his bold intrusion
to the account of Miss Byron; he having been told
that she was to be there. 
Whatever were his motive, Lady Betty said, he
did her favour; and she was sure the whole company
would think themselves doubly obliged to Miss Byron. 
The student look'd as if he thought himself eclipsed
by Sir Hargrave, and as if, in revenge, he was putting
his fine speeches into Latin, and trying them by the
rules of grammar; a broken sentence from a classic
author bursting from his lips; and at last, standing up,
half on tip-toe (as if he wanted to look down upon 

the Baronet) he stuck one hand in his side, and passed
by him, casting a contemptuous eye on his gaudy
dress. 
Mr. Singleton smiled, and look'd as if delighted
with all he saw and heard. Once, indeed, he try'd
to speak: His mouth actually open'd, to give passage
to his words, as sometimes seems to be his way before
the words are quite ready: But he sat down satisfied
with the effort. 
It is true, people who do not make themselves contemptible
by affectation should not be despised. Poor
and rich, wise and unwise, we are all links of the same
great chain. And you must tell me, my dear, if I,
in endeavouring to give true descriptions of the persons
I see, incur the censure I bestow on others, who
despise any-one for defects they cannot help. 
Will you forgive me, my dear, if I make this Letter
as long my last! 
No, say. 
Well then, I thank you for a freedom so consistent
with our friendship: And I will conclude with assureances,
that I am, and ever will be 
Most affectionately Yours,
Harriet Byron. 

