



Miss Montague, To John Belford, Esq; 

M. Hall, Friday, Sept. 15. 
Sir,
My Lord having the gout in his right-hand, his
Lordship, and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty,
have commanded me to inform you, that before your
Letter came, Mr. Lovelace was preparing for a foreign
Tour. We shall endeavour to hasten him away on the
motives you suggest. 
We are all extremely affected with the dear Lady's
death. Lady Betty and Lady Sarah have been indisposed
ever since they heard of it. They had pleased
themselves, as had my Sister and self, with the hopes
of cultivating her acquaintance and friendship after he
was gone abroad, upon her own terms. Her kind remembrance 

of each of us has renewed, tho' it could not
heighten, our regrets for so irreparable a loss. We shall
order Mr. Finch, our goldsmith, to wait on you. He
has our directions about the rings. They will be long,
long worn in memory of the dear Testatrix. 
Every-body is assured, that you will do all in your
power to prevent farther ill consequences from this melancholy
affair. My Lord desires his compliments to
you. I am, Sir, 
Your humble Servant,
Ch. Montague. 
&line;
This collection having run into a much greater
length than was wished, it is thought proper to
omit several Letters that passed between Colonel Morden,
Miss Howe, Mr. Belford, and Mr. Hickman, in
relation to the execution of the Lady's Will, &c. 
It is however necessary to observe on this subject, That
the unhappy Mother, being supported by the two Uncles,
influenced the afflicted Father to over-rule all his
Son's objections, and to direct a literal observation of
the Will; and at the same time to give up all the sums
which he was impowered by it to reimburse himself; 
as also to take upon himself to defray the funeral expences. 
Mr. Belford so much obliged Miss Howe by his steadiness,
equity, and dispatch, and by his readiness to
contribute to the directed collection, that she voluntarily
entered into a correspondence with him, as the representative
of her beloved friend. In the course of
which, he communicated to her (in confidence) the
Letters which passed between him and Mr. Lovelace,
and, by Colonel Morden's consent, those which passed
between that gentleman and himself. 
He sent with the first parcel of Letters which he had
transcribed out of short-hand for Miss Howe, a Letter
to Mr. Hickman, dated the 16th of September, in
which he expresses himself as follows: 

‘But I ought, Sir, in this parcel to have kept out
one Letter. It is that which relates to the Interview
between yourself and Mr. Lovelace, at Mr. Dormer's
(a) . In which Mr. Lovelace treats you with
an air of levity, which neither your person, your
character, nor your commission, deserved; but which
was his usual way of treating every one whose business
he was not pleased with. I hope, Sir, you have too
much greatness of mind, to be disturbed at the contents
of this Letter, should Miss Howe communicate
them to you; and the rather, as it is impossible that
you should suffer with her on that account.’ 
Mr. Belford then excuses Mr. Lovelace, as a good-natured
man with all his faults; and gives instances of
his still greater freedoms with himself. 
To this Mr. Hickman answers, in his Letter of the
18th: 
‘As to Mr. Lovelace's treatment of me in the Letter
you are pleased to mention, I shall not be concerned
at it, whatever it be. I went to him prepared
to expect odd behaviour from him; and was not disappointed. 
I argue to myself, in all such cases as
this, as Miss Howe, from her ever-dear friend, argues; 
That if the reflections thrown upon me are just, I ought
not only to forgive them, but to endeavour to profit by
them: If unjust, that I ought to despise them, and the
reflector too; since it would be inexcuseable to strengthen
by anger an enemy whose malice might be disarmed by
contempt. And, moreover, I should be almost sorry
to find myself spoken well of by a man who could
treat as he treated a Lady who was an ornament to
her Sex, and to human nature. 
‘I thank you, however, Sir, for your consideration
for me in this particular; and for your whole Letter,
which gives me so desirable an instance of the friendship
which you assured me of, when I was last in 

town; and which I as cordially embrace, as wish to
cultivate.’ 
Miss Howe, in hers of the 20th, acknowleging the
receipt of the Letters, and Papers, and Legacies, sent
with Mr. Belford's Letter to Mr. Hickman, assures
him, ‘That no use shall be made of his communications,
but what he shall approve of. 
He had mentioned with compassion the distresses of
the Harlowe family—‘Persons of a pitiful nature, says
she, may pity them. I am not one of those. You, I
think, pity the infernal man likewise; while I from
my heart grudge him his phrensy, because it deprives
him of that remorse, which, I hope, on his recovery,
will never leave him. At times, Sir, let me tell you,
that I hate your whole Sex for his sake; even men of
unblameable characters; whom at those times I cannot
but look upon as persons I have not yet found out. 
‘If my dear creature's personal jewels be sent up to
you for sale, I desire that I may be the purchaser of
them, at the highest price—Of the necklace and solitaire
particularly. 
‘O what tears did the perusal of my Beloved's Will
cost me! —But I must not touch upon the heart-piercing
subject. I can neither take it up, nor quit
it, but with execration of the man whom all the
world must execrate.’ 
Mr. Belford, in his answer, promises, that she shall
be the purchaser of the jewels, if they come into his
hands. 
He acquaints her, that the family had given Col.
Morden the keys of all that belonged to the dear departed: 
That the unhappy Mother had (as the Will allows)
ordered a piece of needlework to be set aside for
her, and had desired Mrs. Norton to get the little book
of Meditations transcribed, and to let her have the original,
as it was all of her dear daughter's hand-writing; 
and as it might, when she could bear to look into it, 

administer consolation to herself. And that she had likewise
reserved for herself her picture in the Vandyke taste. 
Mr. Belford sends with this Letter to Miss Howe
the Lady's memorandum-book; and promises to send
her copies of the several posthumous Letters. He tells
her, that Mr. Lovelace being upon the recovery, he
had inclosed the posthumous Letter directed for him to
Lord M. that his Lordship might give it to him, or
not, as he should find he could bear it. The following
is a copy of that Letter. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
Thursday, Aug. 24. 
I told you, in the Letter I wrote to you on Tuesday
last (a) , that you should have another sent you when
I had got to my Father's house. 
I presume to say, that I am now, at your receiving
of This, arrived there; and I invite you to follow me,
as soon as you can be prepared for so great a journey. 
Not to allegorize further—My fate is now, at your
perusal of this, accomplished. My doom is unalterably
fixed: And I am either a miserable or a happy Being to
all Eternity. If happy, I owe it solely to the Divine
mercy: If miserable, to your undeserved cruelty. —And
consider now, for your own sake, gay, cruel, fluttering,
unhappy man! consider, whether the barbarous
and perfidious treatment I have met with from you,
was worthy of the hazard of your immortal soul; since
your wicked views were not to be effected but by the 

wilful breach of the most solemn vows that ever were
made by man; and those aided by a violence and baseness
unworthy of a human creature. 
In time then, once more, I wish you to consider your
ways. Your golden dream cannot long last. Your
present course can yield you pleasure no longer than you
can keep off thought or reflection. A hardened insensibility
is the only foundation on which your inward
tranquillity is built. When once a dangerous sickness
seizes you; when once effectual remorse breaks in upon
you; how dreadful will be your condition! How poor
a triumph will you then find it, to have been able, by
a series of black perjuries, and studied baseness, under
the name of Gallantry or Intrigue, to betray poor unexperienced
young creatures, who perhaps knew nothing
but their duty till they knew you! —Not one good
action in the hour of languishing to recollect, not one
worthy intention to revolve, it will be all reproach and
horror; and you will wish to have it in your power to
compound for annihilation. 
Reflect, Sir, that I can have no other motive in
what I write, than your good, and the safety of other
innocent creatures, who may be drawn in by your
wicked arts and perjuries. You have not, in my wishes
for your future welfare, the wishes of a suppliant wife,
endeavouring for her own sake, as well as for yours, to
induce you to reform those ways. They are wholly as
disinterested, as undeserved. But I should mistrust my
own penitence, were I capable of wishing to recompense
evil for evil—if, black as your offences have been
against me, I could not forgive, as I wish to be forgiven. 
I repeat, therefore, that I do forgive you. And may
the Almighty forgive you too! Nor have I, at the
writing of this, any other essential regrets than what
are occasioned by the grief I have given to parents, who,
till I knew you, were the most indulgent of parents; by
the scandal given to the other branches of my family; 

by the disreputation brought upon my Sex; and by the
offence given to Virtue in my fall. 
As to myself, you have only robbed me of what once
were my favourite expectations in the transient life I
shall have quitted when you receive This. You have
only been the cause that I have been cut off in the bloom
of youth, and of curtailing a life, that might have been
agreeable to myself, or otherwise, as had suited the designs
and ends of Providence. I have reason to be
thankful, for being taken away from the evil of supporting
my part of a yoke with a man so unhappy, I
will only say, that, in all probability, every hour I had
lived with him might have brought with it some new
trouble. And I am (indeed thro' sharp afflictions and
distresses) indebted to you, secondarily, as I humbly presume
to hope, for so many years of glory, as might have
proved years of danger, temptation, and anguish, had
they been added to my mortal life. 
So, Sir, tho' no thanks to your intention, you have
done me real service; and in return, I wish you happy. 
But such has been your life hitherto, that you can have
no time to lose, in setting about your repentance. Repentance
to such as have lived only carelesly, and in the
omission of their regular duties, and who never aimed
to draw any poor creatures into evil, is not so easy a
task, nor so much in our own power, as some imagine. 
How difficult a grace then to be obtained, where the
guilt is premeditated, wilful, and complicated! 
To say I once respected you with a preference, is
what I ought to blush to own, since at the very time,
I was far from thinking you even a moral man; tho' I
little thought that you, or indeed that any man breathing,
could be—what you have proved yourself to be. 
But, indeed, Sir, I have long been greatly above you: 
For from my heart I have despised you, and all your
ways, ever since I saw what manner of man you were. 
Nor is it to be wondered, that I should be able so to
do, when that preference was not grounded on ignoble 

motives. For I was weak enough, and presumptuous
enough, to hope to be a means in the hand of Providence
to reclaim a man, whom I thought worthy of
the attempt. 
Nor have I yet, as you will see by the pains I take,
on this solemn occasion, to awaken you out of your
sensual dream, given over all hopes of this nature. 
Hear me therefore, O Lovelace! as one speaking
from the dead—Lose no time—Set about your repentance
instantly—Be no longer the instrument of Satan,
to draw poor souls into those subtile snares, which at
last shall entangle your own feet. Seek not to multiply
your offences, till they become beyond the power, as I
may say, of the Divine Mercy to forgive; since justice,
no less than mercy, is an attribute of the Almighty. 
Tremble and reform, when you read what is the portion
of the wicked man from God. Thus it is written: 
‘The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the
joy of the hypocrite but for a moment. He is cast
into a net by his own feet—He walketh upon a snare. 
Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall
drive him to his feet. His strength shall be hunger-bitten,
and destruction shall be ready at his side. The
first-born of death shall devour his strength. His remembrance
shall perish from the earth; and he shall
have no name in the streets. He shall be chased out
of the world. He shall neither have Son nor Nephew
among his people. They that have seen him shall
say, Where is he? He shall fly away as a dream: He
shall be chased away as a vision of the night. His
meat is the gall of asps within him. He shall
flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him thro'. A fire not blown shall consume
him. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the
earth shall rise up against him. The worm shall feed
sweetly on him. He shall be no more remembred. — 
This is the fate of him that knoweth not God.’— 

Whenever you shall be inclined to consult the Sacred
Oracles, from whence the above threatenings are extracted,
you will find doctrines and texts which a truly
penitent and contrite heart may lay hold of for its consolation. 
May yours, Mr. Lovelace, become such! And may
you be enabled to escape the fate denounced against the
abandoned man, and be entitled to the mercies of a long-suffering
and gracious God, is the sincere prayer of 
Clarissa Harlowe. 