



Dear Sir,
Mr. Locke gives a great many very pretty Instructions
relating to the Play-games of Children; 
but I humbly presume to object to what he
says, in one or two Places. 
He would not indulge them in any Playthings,
but what they make themselves, or endeavour to
make. ‘A smooth Pebble, a Plece of Paper, the
Mother's Bunch of Keys, or any thing they cannot
hurt themselves with, he rightly says, serves
as much to divert little Children, as those more 

chargeable and curious Toys from the Shops,
which are presently put out of Order, and
broken.’ 
These Playthings may certainly do well enough,
as he observes, for little ones: But, methinks, to a
Person of easy Circumstances, since the making
these Toys imploys the industrious Poor, the buying
them for the Child might be dispens'd with,
tho' they were easily broken; and especially as they
are of all Prices, and some less costly, and more durable,
than others. 
‘Tops, Gigs, Battledors, Mr. Locke observes,
which are to be used with Labour, should indeed
be procur'd them—not for Variety, but Exercise:
But if they had a Top, the Scourge-stick
and Leather-strap should be left to their own
making and fitting.’ 
But may I presume to say, That whatever be the
Good Mr. Locke proposes by this, it cannot be
equal to the Mischief Children may do themselves
in making these Playthings? For must they not
have Implements to work with? And is not a Knife,
or other edg'd Tool, without which it is impossible
they can make or shape a Scourge-stick, or any of
their Playthings, a fine Instrument in a Child's
Hands? This Advice is the Reverse of the Caution
warranted from all Antiquity, That it is dangerous
to meddle with edg'd Tools: And I am afraid, the
Tutor must often act the Surgeon, and follow the
Indulgence with a Styptick and a Plaister; and the
young Gentleman's Hands might be so often bound
up, that it might indeed perhaps be one way to
cure him of his earnest Desire to play; but I can
hardly imagine any other Good that it can do him: 

For, I doubt, the excellent Consequences propos'd
by our Author from this Doctrine, such as to teach
the Child Moderation in his Desires, Application,
Industry, Thought, Contrivance, and good Husbandry,
Qualities that, as he observes, will be useful
to him when he is a Man, are too remote to be ingrafted
upon such Beginnings: Altho' it must be
confessed, that, as Mr. Locke wisely observes, good
Habits and Industry cannot be too early inculcated. 
But then, Sir, may I ask, Are not the very Plays
and Sports, to which Children accustom themselves,
whether they make their own Playthings or not,
equivalent to the Work or Labour of grown Persons? 
Yes, Sir, I will venture to say, they are, and
more than equivalent to the Exercises and Labour
of many. 
Mr. Locke advises, that the Child's Playthings
should be as few as possible, in which I intirely agree
with him: That they should be in his Tutor's Power,
who is to give him but One at once. But since it is
the Nature of the human Mind to covet most what
is prohibited, and to set light by what is in its own
Power; I am half doubtful, (only that Mr. Locke
says it, and the Matter may not be so very important,
as other Points, in which I have taken the Liberty
to differ from that Gentleman) whether the
Child's absolute Possession of his own Playthings in
some little Repository, of which he may be permitted
to keep the Key, especially if he make no bad
Use of the Privilege, would not make him more
indifferent to them; while the contrary Conduct
might possibly inhance his Value of them. And
if, when he had done with any Plaything, he were
obllg'd to put it into its allotted Place, and were 

accustom'd to keep Account of the Number and
Places of them severally, this would teach him Order,
and at the same time instruct him to keep a
proper Account of them, and to avoid being a
Squanderer or Waster: And if he should omit to
put his Playthings in their Places, or be careless of
them, the taking them away for a time, or threatening
to give them to others, would make him be
more heedful. 
Mr. Locke says, ‘That he has known a Child
so distracted with the Number and Variety of his
Playthings, that he tired his Maid every Day to
look them over: And was so accustom'd to Abundance,
that he never thought he had Enough,
but was always asking, What more? What new
thing shall I have? A good Introduction, adds he,
ironically, to moderate Desires! and the ready
way to make a contented happy Man!’ 
All that I shall offer to this, is, that there are
few Men so philosophical as one would wish them
to be; much less, Children. But no Doubt, that
this Variety engag'd the Child's Activity; which,
of the two, might be turn'd to better Purposes, than
Sloth or Indolence; and if the Maid was tired, it
might be, because she was not so much alive, as
the Child; and perhaps this Part of the Grievance
might not be so great, because, if she was his Attendant,
'tis probable she had nothing else to do. 
However, in the main, as Mr. Locke says, it
is no matter how few Playthings the Child is indulged
with: But yet I can hardly persuade myself,
that Plenty of them can have such bad Consequences,
as the Gentleman apprehends; and the rather, because
they will excite his Attention, and promote 

his Industry and Activity. His Inquiry after new
Things, let him have few or many, is to be expected
as a Consequence of those natural Desires, which
are implanted in him, and will every Day increase:
But this may be observ'd, That as he grows in Years,
he will be above some Playthings; and so the Number
of the old ones will be always reducible, perhaps,
in a greater Proportion, than the new ones will
increase. 
Mr. Locke observes, on the Head of good Breeding,
That ‘There are Two Sorts of ill Breeding; the
one a sheepish Bashfulness, and the other a misbecoming
Negligence and Disrespect in our Carriage; 
both which, says he, are avoided by duly
observing this one Rule, Not to think meanly of
ourselves, and not to think meanly of others.’ I
think, as Mr. Locke explains this Rule, it is an excellent
one. But on this Head I would beg Leave to
observe, that however discommendable a bashful
Temper is, in some Instances, where it must be
deem'd a Weakness of the Mind, yet, in my humble
Opinion, it is generally the Mark of an ingenious
one, and is always to be preferr'd to an undistinguishing
and hardy Confidence, which, as it seems
to me, is the genuine Production of invincible Ignorance. 
What is faulty in it, which Mr. Locke calls
Sheepishness, should indeed be shaken off as soon
as possible, because it is an Enemy to Merit in its
Advancement in the World: But, Sir, were I to
chuse a Companion for your Billy, as he grows
up, I should not think the worse of the Youth, who,
not having had the Opportunities of knowing Men,
or seeing the World, had this Defect. On the 

contrary, I should be apt to look upon it it as an
outward Fence, or Inclosure, as I may say, to his
Virtue, which might keep off the lighter Attacks
of Immorality, the Hussars of Vice, as I may say,
who are not able to carry on a formal Siege against
his Morals; and I should expect such an one to be
docile, humane, good-humour'd, diffident of himself,
and therefore most likely to improve as well in
Mind as Behaviour: While a harden'd Mind, that
never doubts itself, must be a Stranger to its own
Infirmities; and, suspecting none, is impetuous, overbearing,
incorrigible; and if rich, a Tyrant; if
not, possibly an Invader of other Mens Properties; 
or, at least, such a one, as allows itself to walk so
near the Borders of Injustice, that, where Self is
concern'd, it hardly ever does right things. 
Mr. Locke proposes (§ 148.) a very pretty Method
to cheat Children, as it were, into Learning:
But then, he adds, ‘There may be Dice and Playthings
with the Letters on them to teach Children
the Alphabet by playing.’ And in another
Place, (§ 151.) ‘I know a Person of great Quality
—who by pasting on the Six Vowels (for in
our Language y is one) on the Six Sides of a Die,
and the remaining Eighteen Consonants on the
Sides of Three other Dice, has made this a Play
for his Children, that he shall win, who at One
Cast throws most Words on these Four Dice; 
whereby his eldest Son, yet in Coats, has play'd
himself into Spelling with great Eagerness, and
without once having been chid for it, or forc'd
to it.’ 
I must needs say, my dear Mr. B. that I had
rather your Billy should be a Twelvemonth backwarder 

for want of this Method, than forwarded
by it. For what may not be apprehended from so
early allowing, or rather inculcating, the Use of
Dice and Gaming upon the Minds of Children? 
Let Mr. Locke himself speak to this in his § 208.
and I should be glad to be able to reconcile the
Two Passages in this excellent Author. —‘As to
Cards and Dice, says he, I think the safest and
best way is, never to learn any Play upon them,
and so to be incapacitated for these dangerous
Temptations, and incroaching Wasters of useful
Time'—and, he might have added, of the noblest
Estates and Fortunes; while Sharpers and
Scoundrels have been lifted into Distinction upon
their Ruins. Yet, in § 153. Mr. Locke proceeds
to give particular Directions in relation to the Dice
he recommends. 
But, after all, if some innocent Plays were fix'd
upon to cheat Children into Reading, that, as he
says, should look as little like a Task as possible,
it must needs be of Use for that Purpose. But let
every Gentleman, who has a Fortune to lose, and
who, if he games, is on a Foot with the vilest
Company, who generally have nothing at all to
risque, tremble at the Thoughts of teaching his Son,
tho' for the most laudable Purposes, the early Use
of Dice and Gaming. 
But, dear Sir, permit me to say, how much
I am charm'd with a Hint in Mr. Locke, which
makes your Pamela hope, she may be of greater
Use to your Children, even as they grow up, than
she could ever have flatter'd herself to be. —'Tis
a charming Paragraph; I must not skip one Word
of it. Thus it begins, and I will observe upon it 

as I go along. § 177. ‘But under whose Care soever
a Child is put to be taught, says Mr. Locke,
during the tender and flexible Years of his Life,
this is certain, it should be one, who thinks Latin
and Language the least Part of Education.’ 
How agreeable is this to my Notions; which
I durst not have avow'd, but after so excellent a
Scholar! For I have long had the Thought, that a
great deal of precious Time is wasted to little Purpose
in the attaining of Latin. Mr. H. I think,
says, he was Ten Years in endeavouring to learn it,
and, as far as I can find, knows nothing at all of
the Matter neither! —Indeed he lays that to the
wicked Picture in his Grammar, which he took for
granted, (as he has said several times, as well as once
* written) was put there to teach Boys to rob Orchards,
instead of improving their Minds in Learning,
or common Honesty. 
But (for this is too light an Instance for the
Subject) Mr. Locke proceeds—‘One who, knowing
how much Virtue, and a well-temper'd Soul,
is to be preferr'd to any sort of Learning or Language,
[What a noble Writer is this!] makes it
his chief Business to form the Minds of his Scholars,
and give that a right Dispposition: [Ay,
there, dear Sir, is the Thing!] Which if once
got, tho' all the rest should be neglected, [charmingly
observ'd!] would, in due time, [without
wicked `Dice, I hope!] produce all the rest; and
which, if it be not got and settled, so as to keep
out ill and vicious Habits, Languages and Sciences,
and all the other Accomplishments of Education,
will be to no Purpose, but to make the 

worse or more dangerous Man. [Now comes the
Place I am So much delighted with!] And indeed,
whatever Stir there is made about getting
of Latin, as the great and difficult Business, his
Mother [O thank you, thank you, dear Sir, for
putting this excellent Author into my Hands!]
may teach it him herself, if she will but spend
two or three Hours in a Day with him, [—If
she will? Never fear, dear Sir, but I will, with
the bighest Pleasure in the World!] and make
him read the Evangelists in Latin to her. [How
I long to be five or six Years older, as well as my
dearest Babies, that I may cnter upon this charming
Scheme!] For she need but buy a Latin Testament,
and having got somebody to mark the
last Syllable but one, where it is long, in Words
above Two Syllables, (which is cnough to regulate
her Pronunciation, and Accenting the Words)
read daily in the Gospels, and then let her avoid
understanding them in Latin, if she can.’ 
Why, dearest, dear Sir, you have taught me
almost all this already; and you, my best and
most beloved Tutor, have told me often, I read
and pronounce Latin more than tolerably, tho' I
don't understand it: But this Method will teach me,
as well as your dear Children. But thus the good
Gentleman proceeds: ‘And when she understands
the Evangelists in Latin, let her in the same manner
read Æsop's Fables, and so proceed on to
Eutropius, Justin, and such other Books. I do
not mention this, adds Mr. Locke, as an Imagination
of what I fansy may do, but as of a thing I
have known done, and the Latin Tongue got
with Ease this way.’ 

Mr. Locke proceeds to mention other Advantages,
which the Child may receive from his Mother's
Instruction, which I will endeavour more and
more to qualify myself for: Particularly, after he
has intimated, That ‘At the same time that the
Child is learning French and Latin, he may be
enter'd also in Arithmetick, Geography, Chronology,
History, and Geometry too; for if, says he,
these be taught him in French or Latin, when
he begins once to understand either of these
Tongues, he will get a Knowlege in these Sciences,
and the Language to boot.’ After he has
intimated this, I say, he proceeds: ‘Geography, I
think, should be begun with: For the learning
of the Figure of the Globe, the Situation and
Boundaries of the Four Parts of the World, and
that of particular Kingdoms and Countries, being
only an Exercise of the Eyes and Memory, a
Child with Pleasure will learn and retain them. 
And this is so certain, that I now live in a House
with a Child, whom his Mother has so well
instructed this way in Geography, [But had she
not, do you think, dear Sir, some of this good
Gentleman's kind Assistance?] that he knew the
Limits of the Four Parts of the World; would
readily point, being ask'd, to any Country upon
the Globe, or any County in the Map of England;
knew all the great Rivers, Promontories,
Streights, and Bays in the World; and could find
the Longitude and Latitude of any Place, before
he was Six Years old.’ 
There's for you, dear Sir! —See what a
Mother can do, if she pleases! 

I remember, Sir, formerly, in that sweet
* Chariot Conference, at the Dawning of my
Hopes, when all my Dangers were happily over, (a
Conference I shall always think of with Pleasure)
that you ask'd me, How I would bestow my Time,
supposing the neighbouring Ladies would be above
being seen in my Company; when I should have
no Visits to receive or return; no Parties of Pleasure
to join in; no Card-tables to imploy my Winter
Evenings? 
I then, Sir, transported with my opening Prospects,
prattled to you, how well I would endeavour
to pass my Time in the Family Management and
Accounts, in Visits now-and-then to the indigent
and worthy Poor; in Musick sometimes; in Reading,
in Writing, in my superior Duties—And I
hope I have not behaved quite unworthily of my
Promises. 
But I also remember, dear Sir, what once you
said on a certain Occasion, which now, since the
fair Prospect is no longer distant, and that I have
been so long your happy, thrice happy Wife, I may
repeat without those Blushes which then cover'd my
Face: Thus then, with a modest Grace, and with
that virtuous Endearment, that is so beautiful in
your Sex, as well as in ours, whether in the Character
of Lover or Husband, Maiden or Wife, you
were pleased to say, ‘And I hope, my Pamela, to
have superadded to all these, such an Imployment’ 
—as—in short, Sir, I am now bless'd
with, and writing of; no less than the useful Part
I may be able to take in the first Education of your
beloved Babies! 

And now I must add, That this pleasing Hope
sets me above all other Diversions: I wish for no
Parties of Pleasure but with you, my dearest Mr. B.
and these are Parties that will improve me, and
make me more capable of the other, and more
worthy of your Conversation, and of the Time you
pass (beyond what I could ever have promised to
my utmost Wishes) in such poor Company as mine,
for no other Reason but because I love to be instructed,
and take my Lessons well, as you are pleas'd
to say: And indeed I must be a sad Dunce, if I
did not, from so skilful and so beloved a Master. 
I want no Card-table Amusements: For I hope,
in a few Years, (and a proud Hope it is) to be able
to teach your dear Little-ones the first Rudiments,
as Mr. Locke points the Way, of Latin, of French,
and of Geography, and Arithmetick. 
O my dear Mr. B. by your Help and Countenance,
what may I not be able to teach them! and
how may I prepare the Way for a Tutor's Instructions,
and give him up Minds half cultivated to
his Hands! —And all this time improve myself
too, not only in Science, but in Nature, by tracing
in the little Babes what all Mankind are, and
have been, from Infancy to riper Years, and watching
the sweet Dawnings of Reason, and delighting
in every bright Emanation of that Ray of Divinity
lent to the human Mind, for great and happy Purposes,
when rightly pointed and directed! 
There is no going further in this Letter, after
these charming Recollections and Hopes: For they
bring me to that grateful Remembrance, to whom,
under God, I owe them all, and also what I have
been for so happy a Period, and what I am, which 

is, what will ever be my Pride and my Glory; and
well it may, when I look back to my Beginning,
which I ever shall, with humble Acknowlegement,
and can call myself, dearest Mr. B. 
Your honoured and honouring,
and, I hope I may say,
in time, useful Wife,
P. B. 

