


Lett.
I.Belford, To Lovelace. Particulars of the Lady's truly
Christian behaviour in her last hours. A short sketch of her
character.
II.From the same. The three next following Letters brought by a
servant in livery, directed To the departed Lady; viz.
III.From Mrs. Norton. With the news of a general Reconciliation,
upon her own conditions.
IV.From Miss Arabella. In which she assures her of all their returning
Love and Favour.
V.From Mr. John Harlowe. Regretting, that things have been
carried so far; and desiring her to excuse his part in what had passed.
VI.Belford, To Lovelace. His Executorial proceedings. Eleven posthumous
Letters of the Lady. Copy of one of them written to himself.
Tells Lovelace of one written to him, in pursuance of her promise
in her Allegorical Letter (See No. lii. of Vol. VII.) Other
Executorial proceedings. The Colonel's Letter to James Harlowe,
signifying Clarissa's request to be buried at the feet of her Grandfather.
VII.From the same. Mrs. Norton arrives. Her surprize and grief
to find her beloved young Lady departed. The posthumous Letters
calculated to give comfort, and not to reproach.
VIII. IX. X. XI. XII.Copies of Clarissa's posthumous Letters to her
Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, and Uncles.
Substance of her Letter to her Aunt Hervey, concluding with advice to
her Cousin Dolly.
Substance of her Letter to Miss Howe, with advice in favour of Mr.
Hickman.
XIII.Belford, To Lovelace. The wretched Sinclair breaks her leg,
and dispatches Sally Martin to beg a visit from him, and that he will
procure for her the Lady's forgiveness. Sally's remorse for the treatment
she gave her at Rowland's. Acknowleges the Lady's ruin to
be in a great measure owing to their instigations.
XIV.From the same. Miss Howe's distress on receiving the fatal news,
and the posthumous Letters directed to her. Copy of James Harlowe's
Answer to Colonel Morden's Letter, in which he relates the unspeakable
distress of the family; endeavours to exculpate himself; desires
the body may be sent down to Harlowe-Place; and that the
Colonel will favour them with his company.

XV.Belford, To Lovelace. The corpse sent down, attended by the
Colonel, and Mrs. Norton.
XVI.Mowbray, To Belford. An account of Lovelace's delirious unmanageableness,
and extravagant design, had they not all interposed.
They have got Lord M. to him. He endeavours to justify Lovelace
by Rakish principles, and by a true story of a villainy which he thinks
greater than that of Lovelace by Clarissa.
XVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Written in the height of his delirium.
The whole world, he says, is but one great Bedlam. Every one in
it mad but himself.
XVIII.Belford, To Mowbray. Desires that Lovelace, on his recovery,
may be prevailed upon to go abroad. And why. Exhorts him and
Tourville to reform, as he is resolved to do.
XIX.Belford, To Lovelace. Describing the terrible impatience, despondency,
and death of the wretched Sinclair.
As the bad house is often mentioned in this work, without any other stigma
than what arises from the wicked principles and actions occasionally
given of the wretches who inhabit it; Mr. Belford here enters into
the secret retirements of these creatures, and exposes them in the appearances
they are supposed to make, before they are tricked out to ensnare
weak and inconsiderate minds.
XX.Colonel Morden, To Mr. Belford. With an account of his arrival
at Harlowe-Place before the body. The dreadful distress of the whole
family in expectation of its coming. The deep remorse of James and
Arabella Harlowe. Mutual recriminations on recollecting the numerous
instances of their inexorable cruelty. Mrs. Norton so ill, he
was forced to leave her at St. Albans. He dates again to give a further
account of their distress on the arrival of the herse. Solemn
respect paid to her memory by crouds of people.
XXI.From the same. Further interesting accounts of what passed
among the Harlowes. Miss Howe expected to see, for the last time,
her beloved friend.
XXII.From the same. Miss Howe arrives. The Colonel receives her.
Her tender woe; and characteristic behaviour.
XXIII.From the same. Mrs. Norton arrives. Amended in spirits.
To what owing. Further recriminations of the unhappy Parents.
They attempt to see the corpse; but cannot. Could ever wilful
hard-heartedness, the Colonel asks, be more severely punished? Substance
of the Lady's posthumous Letter to Mrs. Norton.
XXIV.From the same. Account of the funeral solemnity. Heads of
the eulogium. The universal justice done to the Lady's great and
good qualities. Other affecting particulars.
XXV.Belford, To Colonel Morden. Compliments him on his pathetic
narratives. Further Account of his Executorial proceedings.
XXVI.James Harlowe, To Belford.
XXVII.Mr. Belford. In Answer.
The Lady's Last Will. In the preamble to which, as well as in
the body of it, she gives several instructive hints; and displays, in

an exemplary manner, her forgiving spirit, her piety, her charity,
her gratitude, and other Christian and heroic virtues, p. 96.
XXVIII.Colonel Morden, To Mr. Belford. The Will read.
What passed on the occasion.
XXIX.Belford, To Lord M. Apprehends a vindictive resentment
from the Colonel. Desires that Mr. Lovelace may be prevailed on to
take a tour.
XXX.Miss Montague. In Answer.
Summary account of proceedings relating to the execution of the Lady's
Will, and other matters. Substance of a Letter from Mr. Belford to
Mr. Hickman; of Mr. Hickman's Answer; and of a Letter from
Miss Howe to Mr. Belford, p. 119–122.
The Lady's posthumous Letter to Mr. Lovelace, p. 122.
XXXI.Lovelace, To Belford. Describing his delirium as dawning
into sense and recollection. All is conscience and horror with him,
he says. A description of his misery at its height.
XXXII.From the same. Revokes his last Letter, as ashamed of it.
Yet breaks into fits and starts, and is ready to go back again.
Why, he asks, did his Mother bring him up to know no controul? His
heart sickens at the recollection of what he was. Dreads the return
of his malady. Makes an effort to forget all.
XXXIII.From the same. Is preparing to leave the kingdom. His
route. Seasonable warnings, tho' delivered in a ludicrous manner, on
Belford's resolution to reform. Complains that he has been strangely
kept in the dark of late. Demands a Copy of the Lady's Will.
XXXIV.Belford, To Lovelace. Justice likely to overtake his instrument
Tomlinson. On what occasion. The wretched man's remorse
on the Lady's account. Belford urges Lovelace to go abroad for
his health. Answers very seriously to the warnings he gives him.
Amiable scheme for the conduct of his future life.
XXXV.Lovelace, To Belford. Pities Tomlinson. Finds that he is
dead in prison. Happy that he lived not to be hanged. Why. No
discomfort so great but some comfort may be drawn from it. Endeavours
to defend himself by a whimsical case which he puts between A, a
miser, and B, as thief.
XXXVI.From the same. Ridicules him on the scheme of life he has
drawn out for himself. In his manner gives Belford some further
cautions and warnings. Reproaches him for not saving the Lady.
A breach of confidence in some cases is more excuseable than to keep a
secret. Raillies him on his person and air, on his Cousin Charlotte,
and the Widow Lovick.
XXXVII.Mr. Belford, To Colonel Morden. On a declaration he had
heard he had made of taking vengeance of Mr. Lovelace. His arguments
with him on that subject from various topics.
XXXVIII.The Lady's posthumous Letter to her Cousin Morden. Containing
arguments against Duelling, as well with regard to her particular
case, as in general. See also Letter x, to her Brother on the
same subject.

XXXIX.Colonel Morden, To Mr. Belford. In answer to his pleas
against avenging his Cousin. He paints in very strong colours the
grief and distress of the whole family on the loss of a child whose
character and excellencies rise upon them to their torment.
XL.From the same. Further particulars relating to the execution of
the Lady's Will. Gives his thoughts of womens friendships in general; 
of that of Miss Howe, and his Cousin, in particular. An early
habit of familiar Letter-writing, how improving. Censures Miss
Howe for her behaviour to Mr. Hickman. Mr. Hickman's good
character. Caution to Parents who desire to preserve their Childrens
veneration for them. Mr. Hickman, unknown to Miss Howe, puts
himself and equipage in mourning for Clarissa. Her lively turn upon
him on that occasion. What he, the Colonel, expects from the generosity
of Miss Howe in relation to Mr. Hickman. Weakness of
such as are afraid of making their Last Wills.
XLI.Belford, To Miss Howe. With copies of Clarissa's posthumous
Letters; and respectfully, as from Colonel Morden and himself, reminding
her of her performing her part of her dear friend's last desires
in making one of the most deserving men in England happy. Informs
her of the delirium of Lovelace, in order to move her compassion
for him, and of the dreadful deaths of Sinclair and Tomlinson.
XLII.Miss Howe, To Mr. Belford. Observations on the Letters
and subjects he communicates to her. She promises another Letter
in answer to his and Colonel Morden's call upon her in Mr. Hickman's
favour. Applauds the Colonel for purchasing her beloved
friend's jewels in order to present them to Miss Dolly Hervey.
XLIII.From the same. She accounts for, tho' not defends, her treatment
of Mr. Hickman. She owns, that he is a man worthy of a better
choice; that she values no man more than him; and assures Mr.
Belford, and the Colonel, that her endeavours shall not be wanting to
make him happy.
XLIV.Mr. Belford, To Miss Howe. A Letter full of grateful acknowlegements
for the favour of hers.
XLV.Lord M. To Mr. Belford. Acquainting him with his Kinsman's
setting out for London, in order to embark. Wishes him to
prevent a meeting between him and Mr. Morden.
XLVI.Mr. Belford, To Lord M. Has had a visit from Mr. Lovelace.
What passed between them on the occasion. Has an interview with
Colonel Morden.
XLVII.From the same. Just returned from attending Mr. Lovelace
part of his way towards Dover. Their solemn parting.
XLVIII.From the same. An account of what passed between himself
and Colonel Morden at their next meeting. Their affectionate
parting.
XLIX.Miss Howe, To Mr. Belford. Gives, at his request, the
character of her beloved friend at large; and an account of the particular
distribution of her time in the twenty-four hours of the natural
day.
L.Lovelace, To Belford, from Paris. Conscience the conqueror of

souls. He cannot run away from his reflections. Alterations in his
proposed route. He desires a particular account of all that has passed
since he left England.
LI.Belford, To Lovelace. Answers him as to all the particulars he
writes about. Wishes he would bend his course towards the Pyrenees,
rather than to the courts he had before visited.
LII.Lovelace, to Belford. Has received a Letter from Joseph Leman
(who, he says, is conscience-ridden) to inform him, that Colonel
Morden resolves to have his will of him. He has hints from
Mowbray to the same effect. He cannot bear to be threatened. He
will write to the Colonel to know his purpose. He requires Belford
fairly to acquaint him with what he knows of it. He cannot get off
his regrets on account of the dear Lady for the blood of him.
LIII.Belford, To Lovelace. It would be matter of serious reflection to
him, he says, if that very Leman, who had been his machine, should
be the instrument of his fall. Beseeches him to avoid the Colonel:
And why.
LIV.Lovelace, To Belford. His resentment on believing himself to
be threatened. Has written to the Colonel to know his intention:
But yet in such a manner that he may handsomely avoid taking it
as a challenge; tho' in the like case he owns that he himself should not.
Copy of his Letter to the Colonel.
LV.Lovelace, To Belford. He is now in his way to Trent, in order
to meet Colonel Morden, in pursuance of his Answer to his Letter.
Copy of that Answer; and of his Reply. His reflections on his ingratitude
to the most excellent of women haunt him in all his amusements,
and make him the most miserable of beings. He acquits the
Lady of all tyranny, affectation, and undue reserve: Execrates the
women; who, by the efficacy which his wanton and conceited folly
gave to their instigations have amply, he says, revenged upon him
their own ruin, which they lay at his door. He is sure of victory; 
but will not, if he can help it, out of regard to the memory of Clarissa,
kill the Colonel.
LVI.From the same. Interview with Colonel Morden. To-morrow,
says he, is the day, that will, in all probability, send either one or
two ghosts to attend the Manes of my Clarissa. He doubts not to
give the Colonel his life, or his death; and to be able, by next morning
Eleven, to write all the particulars.
LVII.The Issue of the Duel.
Conclusion.
Postscript.
A Copy of Verses on the Work.