



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Morning, Seven o'Clock (April 7.) 
My Aunt Hervey, who is a very early riser, was
walking in the garden (Betty attending her, as
I saw from my window this morning) when I arose; 
for after such a train of fatigue and restless nights, I
had unhappily overslept myself: So all I durst venture
upon, was, to step down to my poultry-yard, and deposit
mine of yesterday, and last night. And I am
just come up; for she is still in the garden. This prevents
me from going to resume my Letter, as I think
still to do; and hope it will not be too late. 
I said, I had unhappily overslept myself. I went
to bed at about half an hour after Two. I told the
quarters till Five; after which I dropt asleep, and
awaked not till past Six, and then in great terror, from
a dream, which has made such an impression upon me,
that, slightly as I think of dreams, I cannot help taking
this opportunity to relate it to you. 
‘Methought my Brother, my Uncle Antony, and
Mr. Solmes, had formed a plot to destroy Mr.
Lovelace; who discovering it, and believing I had
a hand in it, turned all his rage against me. I thought
he made them all fly into foreign parts upon it; and
afterwards seizing upon me, carried me into a churchyard; 
and there, notwithstanding all my prayers
and tears, and protestations of innocence, stabbed
me to the heart, and then tumbled me into a deep
grave ready dug, among two or three half-dissolved
carcases; throwing in the dirt and earth upon me
with his hands, and trampling it down with his feet.’ 
I awoke in a cold sweat, trembling, and in agonies; 
and still the frightful images raised by it, remain
upon my memory. 
But why should I, who have such real evils to contend 

with, regard imaginary ones? This, no doubt,
was owing to my disturbed imagination; huddling together
wildly all the frightful ideas which my Aunt's
communications and discourse, my Letter to Mr.
Lovelace, my own uneasiness upon it, and the apprehensions
of the dreaded Wednesday, furnished me with. 
Eight o'Clock. 
The man, my dear, has got the Letter! —What
a strange diligence! I wish he mean me well, that he
takes so much pains! —Yet, to be ingenuous, I must
own, that I should be displeased if he took less—I wish,
however, he had been an hundred miles off! —What
an advantage have I given him over me! 
Now the Letter is out of my power, I have more
uneasiness and regret than I had before. For, till now,
I had a doubt whether it should or should not go: And
now I think it ought not to have gone. And yet is
there any other way than to do as I have done, if I
would avoid Solmes? But what a giddy creature shall
I be thought, if I pursue the course to which this Letter
must lead me? 
My dearest friend, tell me, Have I done wrong? — 
Yet do not say I have, if you think it; for should all
the world besides condemn me, I shall have some comfort,
if you do not. The first time I ever besought
you to flatter me. That, of itself, is an indication
that I have done wrong, and am afraid of hearing the
truth—O tell me (but yet do not tell me) if I have
done wrong! 
Friday, Eleven o'Clock. 
My Aunt has made me another visit. She began
what she had to say with letting me know, That my
friends are all persuaded that I still correspond with
Mr. Lovelace; as is plain, she said, by hints and menaces
he throws out, which shew that he is apprised of
several things that have passed between my relations
and me, sometimes within a very little while after they
have happened. 

Altho' I approve not of the method he stoops to
take to come at his intelligence, yet it is not prudent
in me to clear myself by the ruin of the corrupted
servant (altho' his vileness has neither my connivance,
nor approbation) since my doing so might occasion
the detection of my own correspondence; and so
frustrate all the hopes I have to avoid this Solmes. 
Yet it is not at all unlikely, that this very agent of
Mr. Lovelace acts a double part between my Brother
and him: How else can our family know (so soon too)
his menaces upon the passages they hint at? 
I assured my Aunt, that I was too much ashamed
of the treatment I met with (and that for every one's
sake as well as for my own) to acquaint Mr. Lovelace
with the particulars of that treatment, even were the
means of corresponding with him afforded me: That
I had reason to think, that if he were to know of it
from me, we must be upon such terms, that he would
not scruple making some visits, which would give me
great apprehensions. They all knew, I said, that I
had no communication with any of my Father's servants,
except my Sister's Betty Barnes: For altho' I
had a good opinion of them all, and believed, if left
to their own inclinations, that they would be glad to
serve me: yet, finding by their shy behaviour, that
they were under particular direction, I had forborn,
ever since my Hannah had been so disgracefully dismissed,
so much as to speak to any of them, for fear
I should be the occasion of their losing their places too. 
They must, therefore, account among themselves for
the intelligence Mr. Lovelace met with, since neither
my Brother nor Sister (as Betty had frequently, in
praise of their open hearts, informed me) nor perhaps
their favourite Mr. Solmes, were at all careful before
whom they spoke, when they had any-thing to throw
out against him, or even against me, whom they took
great pride to join with him on this occasion. 
It was but too natural, my Aunt said, for my 

friends to suppose, that he had his intelligence (part of
it at least) from me; who, thinking myself hardly
treated, might complain of it, if not to him, to Miss
Howe; which, perhaps, might be the same thing; 
for they knew Miss Howe spoke as freely of them, as
they could do of Mr. Lovelace; and must have the
particulars she spoke of, from somebody who knew
what was done here. That this determined my Father
to bring the whole matter to a speedy issue, lest
fatal consequences should ensue. 
I perceive you are going to speak with warmth, proceeded
she [And so I was]—For my own part I am
sure, you would not write any-thing, if you do write,
to inflame so violent a spirit. —But this is not the end
of my present visit. 
You cannot, my dear, but be convinced, that your
Father will be obeyed. The more you contend against
his will, the more he thinks himself obliged to assert
his authority. Your Mother desires me to tell you,
that if you will give her the least hopes of a dutiful
compliance, she will be willing to see you in her
closet just now, while your Father is gone to take
a walk in the garden. 
Astonishing perseverane! said I—I am tired with
making declarations and with pleadings on this subject; 
and had hoped, that my resolution being so
well known, I should not have been further urged
upon it. 
You mistake the purport of my present visit, Miss
[looking gravely]—Heretofore you have been desired
and prayed to obey and oblige your friends. Entreaty
is at an end: They give it up. Now it is resolved
upon, that your Father's will is to be obeyed; as it is
fit it should. Some things are laid at your door, as
if you concurred with Lovelace's threatened violence
to carry you off, which your Mother will not believe. 
She will tell you her own good opinion of you. She
will tell you how much she still loves you; and what 

she expects of you on the approaching occasion. But
yet, that she may not be exposed to an opposition,
which would the more provoke her, she desires that
you will first assure her that you go down with a
resolution to do that with a grace which must be done
with or without a grace. And besides, she wants to
give you some advice how to proceed in order to
reconcile yourself to your Father, and to every-body
else. Will you go down, Miss Clary, or will you not? 
I said, I should think myself happy, could I be admitted
to my Mother's presence, after so long a banishment
from it; but that I could not wish it upon
those terms. 
And this is your answer, Niece? 
It must be my answer, Madam. Come what may,
I never will have Mr. Solmes. It is cruel to press this
matter so often upon me. —I never will have that man. 
Down she went with displeasure. I could not help
it. I was quite tired with so many attempts, all to
the same purpose. I am amazed that They are not! — 
So little variation! And no concession on either side! 
I will go down and deposit this; for Betty has seen
I have been writing. The saucy creature took a napkin,
and dipt it in water, and with a fleering air, Here,
Miss; holding the wet corner to me. 
What's That for? said I. 
Only, Miss, one of the fingers of your right-hand,
if you please to look at it. 
It was inky. 
I gave her a look; but said nothing. 
But lest I should have another search, I will close
here. 
Cl. Harlowe. 