


Sir Charles Grandison, To Signor Jeronymo della Porretta. 


London, Sat. Sept. 18–29. 
I Have written, my beloved friend, to Lady Clementina; 
and shall inclose a copy of my Letter. 
I own, that, till I received hers, I thought there was
a possibility, tho' not a probability, that she might
change her mind in my favour. I foresaw that you
would all join, for family-reasons, to press her to 

marry: And when, thought I, she finds herself very
earnestly urged, it is possible, that she will forego her
scruples, and, proposing some conditions for herself,
will honour with her hand the man whom she has
avowedly honoured with a place in her heart, rather
than any other. The malady she has been afflicted
with, often leaves, for some time, an unsteadiness in
the mind: My absence, as I proposed to settle in my
native country, never more, perhaps, to return to
Italy; the high notions she has of obligation and gratitude; 
her declared confidence in my honour and
affection; all co-operating, she may, thought I,
change her mind; and, if she does, I cannot doubt
the favour of her friends. It was not, my Jeronymo,
presumptuous to hope. It was justice to Clementina to
attend the event, and to wait for the promised Letter:
But now, that I see you are all of one mind, and that
the dear Lady, tho' vehemently urged by all her
friends to marry some other man, can appeal to me,
only as to her fourth Brother, and a man not interested
in the event—I give up all my hopes. 
I have written accordingly to your dear Clementina; 
but it could not be expected, that I should give
the argument all the weight that might be given it:
Yet, being of opinion that she was in duty obliged to
yield to the entreaties of all her friends, I have been
honest. But surely no man ever was involved in so
many difficult situations as your Grandison; who yet
never, by enterprize or rashness, was led out of the
plain path into difficulties so uncommon. 
You wish, my dear friend, that I would set an example
to your excellent sister. I will unbosom my
heart to you. 
There is a Lady, an English Lady, beautiful as an
Angel, but whose beauty is her least perfection, either
in my eyes, or her own: Had I never known Clementina,
I could have loved her, and only her, of all
the women I ever beheld. It would not be doing her 

justice, if I could not say, I do love her; but with a
flame as pure as the heart of Clementina, or as her
own heart, can boast. Clementina's distressed mind
affected me: I imputed her sufferings to her esteem
for me. The farewel interview denied her, she demonstrated,
I thought, so firm an affection for me, at
the same time that she was to me, what I may truly
call, a first Love; that, tho' the difficulties in my way
seemed insuperable, I thought it became me, in honour,
in gratitude, to hold myself in suspense, and not
offer to make my addresses to any other woman, till
the destiny of the dear Clementina was determined. 
It would look like vanity in me to tell my Jeronymo
how many proposals, from the partial friends of
women of rank and merit superior to my own, I
thought myself obliged, in honour to the Ladies themselves,
to decline: But my heart never suffered uneasiness
from the uncertainty I was in of ever succeeding
with your beloved sister, but on this Lady's account. 
I presume not, however, to say, I could have
succeeded, had I thought myself at liberty to make my
addresses to her: Yet, when I suffered myself to balance,
because of my uncertainty with your Clementina,
I had hopes, from the interest my two sisters had
with her (her affections disengaged), that, had I been
at liberty to make my addresses to her, I might. 
Shall I, my dear Jeronymo, own the truth? — 
The two noblest-minded women in the world, when
I went over to Italy, on the invitation of my Lord
the Bishop, held almost an equal interest in my heart; 
and I was thereby enabled justly, and with the greater
command of myself, to declare to the Marchioness,
and the General, at my last going over, that I held
myself bound to you; but that your sister, and you
all, were free. But when the dear Clementina began
to shew signs of recovery, and seemed to confirm the
hopes I had of her partiality to me; and my gratitude
and attachment seemed of importance to her complete 

restoration; then, my Jeronymo, did I content myself
with wishing another husband to the English
Lady, more worthy of her than my embarassed situation
could have made me. And when I farther experienced
the condescending goodness of your whole family,
all united in my favour; I had not a wish but
for your Clementina. 
What a disappointment, my Jeronymo, was her
rejection of me! obliged, as I was, to admire the
noble Lady the more for her motives of rejecting me. 
And now, my dear friend, what is your wish? — 
That I shall set your sister an example? How can I? 
Is marriage in my power? There is but one woman
in the world, now your dear Clementina has refused
me, that I can think worthy of succeeding her in my
affections, tho' there are thousands of whom I am not
worthy. And ought that Lady to accept of a man
whose heart had been another's, and that other living,
and single, and still honouring him with so much of
her regard, as may be thought sufficient to attach a
grateful heart, and occasion a divided Love? Clementina
herself is not more truly delicate than this
Lady. Indeed, Jeronymo, I am ready, when I contemplate
my situation, on a supposition of making my
addresses to her, to give up myself, as the unworthiest
of her favour of all the men I know; and she has
for an admirer almost every man who sees her—Even
Olivia admires her! Can I do justice to the merits of
both, and yet not appear to be divided by a double
Love? —For I will own to all the world, my affection
for Clementina; and, as once it was encouraged by
her whole family, glory in it. 
You see, my Jeronymo, how I am circumstanced. 
The example, I fear, must come from Italy; not
from England. Yet say I not this for punctilio-sake:
It is not in my power to set it, as it is in your Clementina's:
It would be presumption to suppose it is. 
Clementina has not an aversion to the state: She 

cannot to the man you have in view, since prepossession
in favour of another is over. —This is a hard push upon
me. I presume not to say what Clementina will,
what she can do: But she is naturally the most dutiful
of children, and has a high sense of the more
than common obligations she owes to parents, to brothers,
to whom she has as unhappily as involuntarily
given great distress: Difference in Religion, the motive
of her rejecting me, is not in the question: Filial
duty is an article of Religion. 
I do myself the honour of writing to the Marchioness,
to the General, to Father Marescotti, and
to Mr. Lowther. May the Almighty perfect your recovery,
my Jeronymo; and preserve in health and
spirits the dear Clementina!—and may every other
laudable wish of the hearts of a family so truly-excellent,
be granted to them!—prays, my dearest Jeronymo,
the friend who expects to see you in England; the
friend who loves you, as he loves his own heart; and
equally honours all of your name; and will, so long
as he is 
Charles Grandison. 

