



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

What can be done with a woman who is above
flattery, and despises all praise but that which
flows from the approbation of her own heart? 
But why will this admirable creature urge her
destiny? Why will she defy the power she is absolutely
dependent upon? —Why will she still wish to 

my face, that she had never left her father's house? — 
Why will she deny me her company, till she makes
me lose my patience, and lay myself open to her resentment? 
—And why, when she is offended, does she
carry her indignation to the utmost length, that a
scornful beauty, in the very height of her power and
pride, can go? 
Is it prudent, think'st thou, in her circumstances,
to tell me, repeatedly to tell me, That she is every
hour more and more dissatisfy'd with herself and me? 
That I am not one, who improve upon her, in my
conversation and address? [Couldst thou, Jack, bear
this from a captive!] That she shall not be easy while
she is with me? That she was thrown upon me by a
perverse fate? That she knew better than to value
herself upon my volubility? That if I thought she
deserv'd the compliments I made her, I might pride
myself in my arts, which had made a fool of so extraordinary
a person? That she should never forgive
herself for meeting me, nor me for seducing her away? 
[Her very words!] That her regrets increase instead
of diminish? That she would take care of herself; 
and since her friends thought it not worth while to
pursue her, she would be left to that care? That I
should make Mrs. Sorlings's house more agreeable by
my absence? —And, go to Berks, to town, or wherever
I would [to the devil, I suppose], with all her
heart? 
The impolitic charmer! —To a temper so vindictive
as she thinks mine! To a free-liver, as she believes
me to be, who has her in his power! —I was
before, as thou knowest, balancing; now this scale,
now that, the heaviest. I only waited to see how
her will would work, how mine would lead me on. 
Thou seest what biass hers takes—And wilt thou
doubt that mine will be determin'd by it? —Were not
her faults before this numerous enough? —Why will
she put me upon looking back?— 

I will sit down to argue with myself by-and-by,
and thou shalt be acquainted with the result. 
If thou knewest, if thou but beheldest, the abject
slave she made me look like! —I had given myself high
airs, as she call'd them: But they were airs that shew'd
my love for her: That shew'd I could not live out of
her company. But she took me down with a vengeance! 
She made me look about me. So much
advantage had she over me; such severe turns upon
me; by my soul, Jack, I had hardly a word to say
for myself. I am asham'd to tell thee, what a poor
creature she made me look like! —But I could have
told her something that would have humbled her pretty
pride at the instant, had she been in a proper place,
and proper company about her. 
To such a place then—and where she cannot fly
me—And then to see how my will works, and what
can be done by the amorous See-saw; now humble; 
now proud; now expecting, or demanding; now
submitting, or acquiescing—till I have tired resistance. 
But these hints are at present enough—I may
further explain myself as I go along; and as I confirm
or recede in my future motions. —If she will revive
past disobligations! —If she will—But no more—No
more, as I said, at present, of threatenings. 