


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thrapston, Tuesday Even. October 17.
We passed several hours at Boughton(a) , and arrived
here in the afternoon. Mr. Deane had
insisted that we should put up at a nephew's of his, in
the neighbourhood of this town. The young gentleman
met us at Oundle, and conducted us to his house. 
I have got such a habit of scribbling, that I cannot
forbear applying to my pen at every opportunity. 
The less wonder, when I have your brother for my
subject; and the two beloved sisters of that brother to
write to. 
It would be almost impertinent to praise a man for
his horsemanship, who in his early youth was so noted
for the performance of all his exercises, that his Father
and General Grandison thought of the military
life for him. Ease and unaffected dignity distinguish
him in all his accomplishments. Bless me, madam!
said Lucy to my aunt, on more occasions than one,
this man is every-thing! 
Shall I own, that I am retired to my pen, just now,
from a very bad motive? Anger. I am, in my heart,
even peevish with all my friends, for clustering so about
Sir Charles, that he can hardly obtain a moment 

(which he seems to seek for, too) to talk with me
alone. My uncle [He does dote upon him] always
inconsiderately stands in his way; and can I say to a
man so very inclinable to raillery, that he should allow
me more, and himself less, of Sir Charles's conversation? 
I wonder my aunt does not give my uncle
a hint. But she loves Sir Charles's company as well
as my uncle. 
This, however, is nothing to the distress my uncle
gave me at dinner this day. Sir Charles was observing,
upon the disposition of one part of the gardens at
Boughton, That Art was to be but the handmaid of
Nature—I have heard, Sir Charles, said my uncle,
that you have made that a rule with you at Grandison-hall. 
With what pleasure should I make a visit there
to you and my niece— 
He stopt. He needed not: He might have said anything
after this. Sir Charles looked as if concerned
for me; yet said, that would be a joyful visit to him. 
My aunt was vexed for my sake. Lucy gave my
uncle such a look!— 
My uncle afterwards indeed apologized to me— 
Ads-heart, I was a little blunt, I believe. But what
a duce need there be these niceties observed when you
are sure? —I am sorry, however—But it would out— 
Yet you, Harriet, made it worse by looking so silly. 
* *
What, Lady G. can I do with this dear man? 
My uncle, I mean. He has been just making a proposal
to me, as he calls it, and with such honest looks
of forecast and wisdom—Look-ye, Harriet—I shall
be always blundering about your scrupulosities. I am
come to propose something to you that will put it out
of my power to make mistakes—I beg of you and
your aunt to allow me to enter with Sir Charles into
a certain subject; and this not for your sake—I know
you won't allow of that—But for the ease of Sir
Charles's own heart. Gratitude is my motive, and 

ought to be yours. I am sure he loves the very ground
you tread upon. 
I besought him for every sake dear to himself, not to
interfere in the matter; but to leave these subjects to
my aunt and me. —Consider, Sir, said I, consider, how
very lately the first personal declaration was made. 
I do, I will consider every-thing—But there is danger
between the cup and the lip. 
Dear Sir (my hands and eyes lifted up) was all the
answer I could make. He went from me hastily,
muttering good-naturedly against Femalities. 
Deane's Grove, Wedn. Sept. 27.
Mr. Deane's pretty box you have seen. Sir
Charles is pleased with it. We looked in at Fotheringay-castle(a) , Milton(b) , &.c. Mr. Charles Deane,
a very obliging and sensible young gentleman, attended
his uncle all the way. 
What charming descriptions of fine houses and curiosities
abroad did Sir Charles give us when we stopt
to bait, or to view the pictures, furniture, gardens,
of the houses we saw! 
In every place, on every occasion, on the road, or
when we alighted, or put up, he shewed himself so
considerate, so gallant, so courteous, to all who approached
him, and so charitable! —Yet not indiscriminately
to every-body that asked him: But he was
bountiful indeed, on representation of the misery of
two honest families. Beggars born, or those who
make begging a trade, if in health, and not lame or
blind, have seldom, it seems, any share in his munificence:
But persons fallen from competence, and such
as struggle with some instant distress, or have large
families, which they have not ability to maintain; 
these, and such as these, are the objects of his bounty. 
Richard Saunders, who is sometimes his almoner, 

told my Sally, that he never goes out but somebody is
the better for him; and that his manner of bestowing
his charity is such, as, together with the poor peoples
blessings and prayers for him, often draws tears from
his eyes. 
* *
I have over-heard a dialogue that has just now
passed between my uncle and aunt. There is but a
thin partition between the room they were in, and
mine; and he spoke loud; my aunt not low; yet
earnest only, not angry. He had been proposing to
her, as he had done to me, to enter into a certain
subject, in pity to Sir Charles: None had he for his
poor niece. No doubt, but he thought he was obliging
me; and that my objection was only owing to
Femality, as he calls it; a word I don't like. I never
heard it from Sir Charles. 
My aunt was not at all pleased with his motion. 
She wished, as I had done, that he would not interfere
in these nice matters. He took offence at the exclusion,
because of the word nice. She said, He was
too precipitating, a great deal: She did not doubt but
Sir Charles would be full early in letting me know his
expectations. 
She spoke more decisively than she is used to do. 
He cannot bear her chidings, tho' ever so gentle. I
need not tell you, that he both loves and reveres her; 
but, as one of the lords of the creation, is apt to be
jealous of his prerogatives. You used to be diverted
with his honest particularities. 
What an ignoramus you women and girls make of
me, Dame Selby! said he. I know nothing of the
world, nor of men and women, that's certain. I am
always to be documented by you and your minxes! 
But the duce take your niceties: You don't, you can't,
poor souls, as you are, distinguish men. You must
all of you go on in one rig-my-roll way; in one
beaten track. Who the duce would have thought it 

needful, when a girl and we all were wishing till our
very hearts were bursting, for this man, when he was
not in his own power, would think you must now
come with your hums, and your haws, and the whole
circum-roundabouts of female nonsense, to stave-off
the point your hearts and souls are set upon? I remember,
Dame Selby, tho' so long ago, how you
treated your future Lord and Master when you prank'd
it, as Lady and Mistress. You vexed my very Soul,
I can tell you that! And often and often, when I
lest you, I swore bitterly, that I never would come
again as a Lover—tho' I was a poor forsworn wretch— 
God forgive me! 
My dear Mr. Selby, you should not remember past
things. You had very odd ways—I was afraid, for a
good while, of venturing with you at all— 
Now, Dame Selby, I have you at a why-not, or I
never had; tho', by the way, your un-evenness increased
my oddness. —But what oddness is in Sir
Charles Grandison? If he is not even, neither you
nor I were ever odd. What reason is there for him to
run the Female gauntlope? I pity the excellent man; 
remembring how I was formerly vexed myself—I hate
this shilly-shally fooling; this know-your-mind and not
know-your-mind nonsense. As I hope to live and
breathe, I'll, I'll, I'll blow you all up, without gun-powder
or oatmeal, if an honest gentleman is thus to
be fooled with; and after such a Letter too from his
friend Jeronymo, in the names of the whole family. 
Lady G. for my money! [Ah, thought I, Lady G.
gives better advice than she even wishes to know how
to take!] I like her notion of parallel lines! —Sir
Charles Grandison is none of your gew-gaw whip-jacks,
that you know not where to have. But I tell
you, Dame Selby, that neither you nor your niece
know how, with your fine souls, and fine sense, to go
out of the common femality-path, when you get a
man into your gin, however superior he is to common 

infanglements, and low chicanery, and dull and cold
forms, as Sir Charles properly called them, in his address
to the little pug's-face. [I do love her, with all her
pretty ape's tricks: For what are you all, but, right
or wrong, apes of one another?] And do you think,
with all your wisdom, he sees not through you? He
does; and, as a wise man, must despise you all, with
your femalities and forsooths— 
No femality, Mr. Selby, is designed—No— 
I am impatient, Dame Selby, light of my eye,
and dear to my heart and soul, as you are; I will take
my own way, in this. I have no mind that the two
dearest creatures in the world, to me, should render
themselves despisable in the eyes of a man they want
to think highly of them. And here if I put in, and
say but a wry word, as you think it—I am to be called
to account.— 
My dear, did you not begin the subject? said my
aunt. 
I am to be closetted, and to be documentized, proceeded
he—Not another word of your documentations,
Dame Selby! I am not in a humour to bear them: I
will take my own way—And that's enough. 
And then, I suppose, he stuck his hands in his
sides, as he does when he is good-humouredly angry; 
and my aunt, at such times, gives up, till a more
convenient opportunity, and then she always carries
her point (And why? Because she is always reasonable); 
for which he calls her a Parthian woman. 
I heard her say, as he stalked out royally, repeating,
that he would take his own way; I say no more, Mr.
Selby—Only consider— 
Oy, and let Harriet consider, and do you consider,
Dame Selby: Sir Charles Grandison is not a common
man. 
I did not let my aunt know that I heard this speech
of my uncle: She only said to me, when she saw me,
I have had a little debate with your uncle: We must 

do as well as we can with him, my dear. He means
well. 
Thursday Morning, October 19.
After breakfast, first one, then another, dropt
away, and lest only Sir Charles and me together. 
Lucy was the last that went; and the moment she
was withdrawn, while I was thinking to retire to
dress, he placed himself by me: Think me not abrupt,
my dearest Miss Byron, said he, that I take almost
the only opportunity which has offered of entering
upon a subject that is next my heart. 
I found my face glow. I was silent. 
You have given me hope, madam: All your friends
encourage that hope. I love, I revere, your friends. 
What I have now to petition for, is, A confirmation
of the hope I have presumed upon. Can you, madam
(the Female delicacy is more delicate than that of man
can be) unequally as you may think yourself circumstanced
with a man who owns that once he could
have devoted himself to another Lady; Can you
say, that the man before you is the man whom you
Can, whom you Do, prefer to any other? 
He stopt; expecting my answer. 
After some hesitations, I have been accustomed,
Sir, said I, by those friends whom you so deservedly
value, to speak nothing but the simplest truth. In
an article of this moment, I should be inexcusable,
if— 
I stopt. His eyes were fixed upon my face. For
my life I could not speak; yet wished to be able to
speak— 
If, If what, madam? and he snatched my hand,
bowed his face upon it, held it there, not looking up
to mine. I could then speak—If thus urged, and by
Sir Charles Grandison—I did not speak my
heart—I answer—Sir—I CAN—I DO. I wanted,
I thought, just then, to shrink into myself. 
He kissed my hand with fervour; dropt down on 

one knee; again kissed it—You have laid me, madam,
under everlasting obligation: And will you permit
me, before I rise—loveliest of women, will you permit
me, to beg an early day? —I have many affairs on
my hands; many more in design, now I am come, as
I hope, to settle in my native country for the rest of
my life. My chief glory will be, to behave commendably
in the private life. I wish not to be a
public man; and it must be a very particular call, for
the Service of my King and Country united, that shall
draw me out into public notice. Make me, madam,
soon, the happy husband I hope to be. I prescribe
not to you the time: But you are above empty forms. 
May I presume to hope, it will be before the end of a
month to come? 
He had forgot himself. He said, he would not prescribe
to me. 
After some involuntary hesitations—I am afraid of
nothing so much, just now, Sir, said I, as appearing,
to a man of your honour and penetration, affected. 
Rise, Sir, I beseech you! I cannot bear— 
I will, madam, and rise as well as kneel, to thank
you, when you have answered a question so very important
to my happiness. 
Before I could resume, Only believe me, madam,
said he, that my urgency is not the insolent urgency
of one who imagines a Lady will receive as a compliment
his impatience. And if you have no scruple that
you think of high importance, add, I beseech you, to
the obligation you have laid him under to your condescending
goodness (and add with that frankness of
heart which has distinguished you in my eyes above all
women) the very high one, of an early day. 
I looked down—I could not look up—I was afraid
of being thought affected—Yet how could I so soon
think of obliging him? 
He proceeded—You are silent, madam! —Propitious
be your silence! Allow me to enquire of your 

aunt, for your kind, your condescending acquiescence. 
I will not now urge you further: I will be all hope. 
Let me say, Sir, that I must not be precipitated. 
These are very early days. 
Much more was in my mind to say; but I hesitated
—I could not speak. Surely, my dear Ladies, it
was too-too early an urgency. And can a woman be
wholly unobservant of custom, and the laws of her
Sex? —Something is due to fashion in dress, however
absurd that dress might have appeared in the last age
(as theirs do to us) or may in the next: And shall not
those customs which have their foundation in modesty,
and are characteristic of the gentler Sex, be intitled to
excuse, and more than excuse? 
He saw my confusion. Let me not, my dearest
life, distress you, said he. Beautiful as your emotion
is, I cannot enjoy it, if it give you pain. Yet is the
question so important to me; so much is my heart
concerned in the favourable answer I hope for from
your goodness; that I must not let this opportunity
slip, except it be your pleasure that I attend your determination
from Mrs. Selby's mouth. —Yet that I
choose not, neither; because I presume for more favour
from your own, than you will, on cold deliberation,
allow your aunt to shew me. Love will plead
for its faithful votary in a single breast, when consultation
on the supposed fit and unfit, the object absent,
will produce delay. But I will retire, for two moments. 
You shall be my prisoner mean time. Not a
soul shall come in to interrupt us, unless it be at your
call. I will return, and receive your determination; 
and if that be the fixing of my happy day, how will
you rejoice me! 
While I was debating within myself, whether I
should be angry or pleated, he returned, and found
me walking about the room. —Soul of my hope, said
he, taking with reverence my hand; I now presume
that you can, that you will, oblige me. 

You have given me no time, Sir: But let me request,
that you will not expect an answer, in relation
to the early day you so early ask for, till after the receipt
of your next Letters from Italy. You see how
the admirable Lady is urged; how reluctantly she has
given them but distant hopes of complying with their
wishes. I should be glad to wait for the next Letters; 
for those, at least, which will be an answer to
yours, acquainting them, that there is a woman with
whom you think you could be happy. I am earnest
in this request, Sir. Think it not owing to affectation. 
I acquiesce, madam. The answer to those Letters
will soon be here. It will indeed be some time before
I can receive a reply to that I wrote in answer to Jeronymo's
last Letter. I impute not affectation to my
dearest Miss Byron. I can easily comprehend your
motive: It is a generous one. But it befits me to
say, that the next Letters from Italy, whatever may
be their contents, can now make no alteration on my
part. Have I not declared myself to your friends, to
you, and to the world? 
Indeed, Sir, they may make an alteration on mine,
highly as I think of the honour Sir Charles Grandison
does me by his good opinion. For, pardon
me, should the most excellent of women think of resuming
a place in your heart— 
Let me interrupt you, madam. —It cannot be, that
Lady Clementina, proceeding, as she has done, on
motives of piety, zealous in her religion, and all her
relations now earnest in another man's favour, can
alter her mind. I should not have acted with justice,
with gratitude, to her, had I not tried her stedfastness
by every way I could devise: Nor, in justice to both
Ladies, would I allow myself to apply for your favour
till I had her resolution confirmed to me under her
own hand after my arrival in England. But were it
now possible that she should vary, and were you, madam, 

to hold your determination in my favour suspended; 
the consequence would be this; I should never, while
that suspense lasted, be the husband of any woman on
earth. 
I hope, Sir, you will not be displeased. I did not
think you would so soon be so very earnest. But this,
Sir, I say, Let me have reason to think, that my happiness
will not be the misfortune of a more excellent
woman, and it shall be my endeavour to make the
man happy who only can make me so. 
He clasped me in his arms with an ardor—that displeased
me not—on reflexion—But at the time startled
me. He then thanked me again on one knee. I
held out the hand he held not in his, with intent to
raise him; for I could not speak. He received it as a
token of favour; kissed it with ardor; arose; again
pressed my cheek with his lips. I was too much surprised
to repulse him with anger: But was he not too
free? Am I a prude, my dear? In the odious sense of
the abused word, I am sure, I am not: But in the best
sense, as derived from prudence, and used in opposition
to a word that denotes a worse character, I own myself
one of those who would wish to restore it to its
natural respectable signification, for the sake of virtue; 
which, as Sir Charles himself once hinted(a) , is in
danger of suffering by the abuse of it; as Religion
once did, by that of the word Puritan. 
Sir Charles, on my making towards the door that
led to the stairs, withdrew with such a grace, as
shewed he was capable of recollection. 
Again I ask, Was he not too free? I will tell you
how I judge that he was: When I came to conclude
my narrative to my aunt and Lucy, of all that passed
between him and me, I blushed, and could not tell
them how free he was. Yet you see, Ladies, that I
can write it to you two. 
Sir Charles, my uncle, and Mr. Deane, took a 

little walk, and returned just as dinner was ready. 
My uncle took me aside, and whispered to me; I am
glad at my heart and soul the ice is broken. This is
the man of true spirit—Ads—heart, Harriet, you will
be Lady Grandison in a fortnight, at furthest, I hope. 
You have had a charming confabulation, I doubt not. 
I can guess you have, by Sir Charles's declaring himself
more and more delighted with you. And he owns,
that he put the question to you. —Hay, Harriet! — 
Smiling in my face. 
Every one's eyes were upon me. Sir Charles, I
believe, saw me look as if I were apprehensive of my
uncle's raillery. He came up to us: My dear Miss
Byron, said he, in my uncle's hearing, I have owned
to Mr. Selby, the request I presumed to make you. 
I am afraid that he, as well as you, think me too bold
and forward. If you do, madam, I ask your pardon:
My hopes shall always be controuled by your pleasure. 
This made my uncle complaisant to me. I was
re-assured. I was pleased to be so seasonably relieved. 
Friday Morning, October 20.
You must not, my dear Ladies, expect me to be
so very minute: If I am, must I not lose a hundred
charming conversations? One, however, I will give
you a little particularly. 
Your brother desired leave to attend me in my
dressing-room—But how can I attempt to describe his
air, his manner, or repeat the thousand agreeable
things he said? Insensibly he fell into talking of future
schemes, in a way that punctilio itself could not be
displeased with. 
He had been telling me, that our dear Mr. Deane,
having been affected by his last indisposition, had desired
my uncle, my aunt, and him, to permit him to
lay before them the state of his affairs, and the kind
things he intended to do by his own relations; who, 

however, were all in happy circumstances. After
which, he insisted upon Sir Charles's being his sole
executor, which he scrupled, unless some other person
were joined with him in the trust: But Mr. Deane
being very earnest on this head, Sir Charles said, I
hope I know my own heart. My dear Mr. Deane,
you must do as you please. 
After some other discourse, I suppose, said I, the
good man will not part with us till the beginning of
next week. 
Whenever you leave him, answered he, it will be
to his regret; it may therefore as well be soon: But
I am sorry, methinks, that he, who has qualities
which endear him to every one, should be so much
alone as he is here. I have a great desire, when I
can be so happy as to find myself a settled man, to
draw into my neighbourhood friends who will dignify
it. Mr. Deane will, I hope, be often our visiter at
the Hall. The love he bears to his dear god-daughter
will be his inducement; and the air and soil being
more dry and wholsome than this so near the fens,
may be a means to prolong his valuable life. 
Dr. Bartlett, continued he, has already carried into
execution some schemes which relate to my indigent
neighbours, and the lower class of my tenants. How
does that excellent man revere Miss Byron! —My
Beauchamp, with our two sisters and their Lords,
will be often with us. Your worthy cousin Reeves's,
Lord W. and his deserving Lady, will also be our visiters,
and we theirs, in turn. The Mansfield family
are already within a few miles of me: And our
Northamptonshire friends! —Visiters and visited— 
What happiness do I propose to myself, and the beloved
of my heart! —And if (as you have generously wished)
the dear Clementina may be happy, at least not unhappy,
and her brother Jeronymo recover; what, in
this world, can be wanting to crown our felicity? 
Tears of joy strayed down my cheek, unperceived 

by me, till they fell upon his hand, as it had mine in
it. He kissed them away. I was abashed. If my
dear Miss Byron permit me to go on, I have her advice
to ask. —I bowed my assent. My heart throbbed
with painful joy: I could not speak. 
Will it not be too early, madam, to ask you about
some matters of domestic concern? The lease of the
house in St. James's Square is expired. Some difficulties
are made to renew it, unless on terms which I
think unreasonable. I do not easily submit to imposition. 
Is there any-thing that you particularly like in
the situation of that house? 
Houses, Sir, nay, Countries, will be alike to me,
in the company of those I value. 
You are all goodness, madam. I will leave it to
my sisters, to enquire after another house. I hope
you will allow them to consult you, as any one may
offer. I will write to the owner of my present house
(who is solicitous to know my determination, and says
he has a tenant ready, if I relinquish it) that it will
be at his command in three months time. When
my dear Miss Byron shall bless me with her hand, and
our Northamptonshire friends will part with her, if she
pleases, we will go directly to the Hall. 
I bowed, and intended to look as one who thought
herself obliged. 
Restrain, check me, madam, whenever I seem to
trespass on your goodness. Yet how shall I forbear to
wish you to hasten the day that shall make you wholly
mine? —You will the rather allow me to wish it, as
you will then be more than ever your own mistress; 
tho' you have always been generously left to a discretion
that never was more deservedly trusted to. Your
will, madam, will ever comprehend mine. 
You leave me, Sir, only room to say, that if gratitude
can make me a merit with you, that began with
the first knowlege I had of you; and it has been increasing
ever since—I hope I never shall be ungrateful. 

Tears again strayed down my cheek. Why did I
weep? 
Delicate sensibility! said he. He clasped his arms
about me—But instantly withdrew them, as if recollecting
himself—Pardon me, madam! Admiration
will sometimes mingle with reverence. I must express
my gratitude as a man—May my happy day be
not far distant, that I may have no bound to my joy! 
—He took my hand, and again pressed it with his
lips. My heart, madam, said he, is in your hand:
You cannot but treat it graciously. 
Just then came in my Nancy [Why came she
in?] with the general expectation of us to breakfast! 
—Breakfast! —What, thought I, is breakfast! — 
The world, my Charlotte—But hush! —Withdraw,
fond heart, from my pen! Can the dearest friend allow
for the acknowlegement of impulses so fervent,
and which, writing to the moment, as I may say, the
moment only can justify revealing? 
He led me down-stairs, and to my very seat, with
an air so noble, yet so tender—My aunt, my Lucy,
every-body—looked at me. My eyes betrayed my
hardly-conquered emotion. 
Sir Charles's looks and behaviour were so respectful,
that every one addressed me as a person of increased
consequence. Do you think, Lady G. that Lord G's
and Lord L's respectful behaviour to their wives do
not as much credit to their own hearts, as to their
Ladies? How happy are you, that you have recollected
yourself, and now encourage not others, by your example,
to make a jest of a husband's Love! —Will
you forgive me the recollection, for the sake of the joy
I have in the reformation?— 
* *
I have read this Letter, just now, to my aunt and
Lucy, all except this last saucy hint to you. They
clasped me each in their arms, and said, They admired
him, and were pleased with me. Instruct me,
my dear Ladies, how to behave in such a manner, as 

may shew my gratitude (I had almost said my Love); 
yet not go so very far, as to leave the day, the hour,
every-thing, to his determination! 
But, on reading to my aunt and Lucy what I had
written, I was ashamed to find, that when he was
enumerating the friends he hoped to have near him,
or about him, I had forgot to remind him of my Emily-Ungrateful
Harriet! —But don't tell her that I was so
absorbed in Self, and that the conversation was so interesting,
that my heart was more of a passive than
an active machine at the time. I will soon find, or
make, an occasion to be her solicitress. You once
thought that Emily, for her own sake, should not live
with us; but her heart is set upon it. Dear creature! 
I love her! I will sooth her! I will take her to my
bosom! —I will, by my sisterly compassion, intitle
myself to all her confidence! She shall have all mine. 
Nor shall her guardian suspect her. —I will be as faithful
to her secret, as you and Lady L. were (thankfully
I remember it!) to mine. Don't you think, my
dear, that if Lady Clementina [I bow to her merit
whenever I name her to myself] had had such a true,
such a soothing friend, to whom she could have revealed
the secret that oppressed her noble heart, while
her passion was young, it would have been attended
with such a deprivation of her reason, as made unhappy
all who had the honour of being related to her? 
* *
O my dear Lady G! I am undone! Emily is undone! 
We are all undone! —I am afraid so! —My
intolerable carelessness! —I will run away from him! 
I cannot look him in the face! —But I am most, most
of all, concerned for my Emily! 
Walking in the garden with Lucy, I dropt the last
sheet, marked 6, of this Letter(a) . 
I missed it not till my aunt this minute told me,
that Sir Charles, crossing the walk which I had just 

before quitted, stooped, and took up a paper. Immediately
my heart misgave me. I took out my Letter:
I thought I had it all—But the fatal, fatal sixth
sheet, is wanting: That must be what he stooped for,
and took up. What shall I do! —Sweet Emily! now
will he never suffer you to live with him. All my
own heart laid open too! —Such prattling also! —I
cannot look him in the face! —How shall I do, to get
away to Shirley-manor, and hide myself in the indulgent
bosom of my grandmamma? —What affectation,
after this, will it be, to refuse him his day! —But he
demands audience of me. Could any-thing (O the
dear Emily!) have happened more mortifying to 
Your Harriet Byron? 

