



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Mrs. Norton. 

Thursday, Aug. 17. 
What Mr. Brand, or any-body, can have
written or said to my prejudice, I cannot imagine; 
and yet some evil reports have gone out against
me; as I find by some hints in a very severe Letter
written to me by my Uncle Antony. Such a Letter
as I believe was never written to any poor creature,
who, by ill health of body, as well as of mind, was
before tottering on the brink of the grave. But my
friends may possibly be better justified than the reporters
—For who knows what they may have heard? 
You give me a kind caution, which seems to
imply more than you express, when you advise me 

against countenancing visitors that may discredit me. 
You should, in so tender a point, my dear Mrs. Norton,
have spoken quite out. Surely, I have had
afflictions enow to strengthen my mind, and to
enable it to bear the worst that can now happen. 
But I will not puzzle myself by conjectural evils; as
I might perhaps do, if I had not enow that were certain. 
I shall hear all, when it is thought proper that I
should. Mean time, let me say, for your satisfaction,
that I know not that I have any-thing criminal
or disreputable to answer for either in word
or deed, since the fatal 10th of April last. 
You desire an account of what passes between me
and my friends; and also particulars or brief heads
of my sad Story, in order to serve me as occasions
shall offer. My dear good Mrs. Norton, you shall
have a whole packet of papers, which I have sent to
my Miss Howe, when she returns them; and you shall
have likewise another packet (and that with this
Letter) which I cannot at present think of sending to
that dear friend for the sake of my own relations; 
whom, without seeing that packet, she is but too
ready to censure heavily. From these you will be
able to collect a great deal of my Story. But for
what is previous to these papers, and which more particularly
relates to what I have suffered from Mr. Lovelace,
you must have patience; for at present I have
neither head nor heart for such subjects. The papers
I send you with this will be those mentioned in the
margin (a) . You must restore them to me as soon as 

perused; and upon your honour make no use of them,
or of any intelligence you have from me, but by my
previous consent. 
These communications you must not, my good
Mrs. Norton, look upon as appeals against my relations. 
On the contrary, I am heartily sorry, that
they have incurred the displeasure of so excellent a
Divine as Dr. Lewen. But you desire to have everything
before you; and I think you ought; for who
knows, as you say, but you may be applied to at last
to administer comfort from their conceding hearts, to
one that wants it; and who sometimes, judging by
what she knows of her own heart, thinks herself
entitled to it? 
I know that I have a most indulgent and sweet-tempered
Mother; but, having to deal with violent
spirits, she has too often forfeited that peace of mind
which she so much prefers, by her over-concern to
preserve it. 
I am sure she would not have turned me over for
an Answer to a Letter written with so contrite and
fervent a spirit, as was mine to her, to a masculine
spirit, had she been left to herself. 
But, my dear Mrs. Norton, might not, think
you, the revered Lady have favoured me with one
private line? —If not, might not you have written by
her order, or connivance, one softening, one motherly line,
when she saw her poor girl, whom once she
dearly loved, borne so hard upon? 
O no, she might not! —Because her heart, to be
sure, is in their measures! —And if she think them
right, perhaps they must be right! —At least knowing
only what they know, they must! —And yet they
might know all, if they would! —And possibly, in
their own good time, they think to make proper
enquiry. —My application was made to them but
lately. —Yet how deeply will it afflict them, if their
time should be out of time! 

When you have before you the Letters I have sent
to Miss Howe, you will see, that Lord M. and the
Ladies of his family, jealous as they are of the honour
of their house (to express myself in their language)
think better of me than my own relations do. You
will see an instance of their generosity to me which
at the time extremely affected me, and indeed still
affects me. Unhappy man! gay, inconsiderate, and
cruel! What has been his gain by making unhappy
a creature who hoped to make him happy! And who
was determined to deserve the Love of all to whom
he is related! —Poor man! —But you will mistake a
compassionate and placable nature for Love! —He
took care, great care, that I should rein-in betimes
any passion that I might have had for him, had he
known how to be but commonly grateful or generous! 
—But the Almighty knows what is best for his
poor creatures. 
Some of the Letters in the same packet will also
let you into the knowlege of a strange step which I
have taken (strange you will think it); and, at the
same time, give you my reasons for taking it (a) . 
It must be expected, that Situations uncommonly
difficult will make necessary some extraordinary steps,
which but for those Situations would be hardly excuseable. 
It will be very happy indeed, and somewhat
wonderful, if all the measures I have been
driven to take should be right. A pure intention,
void of all undutiful resentment, is what must be my
consolation, whatever others may think of those
measures, when they come to know them: Which,
however, will hardly be till it is out of my power to
justify them, or to answer for myself. 
I am glad to hear of my Cousin Morden's safe arrival. 
I should wish to see him methinks: But I am
afraid, that he will sail with the stream; as it must
be expected, that he will hear what they have to say 

first. —But what I most fear, is, that he will take
upon himself to avenge me—Rather than he should
do so, I would have him look upon me as a creature
utterly unworthy of his concern; at least of his vindictive
concern. 
How soothing to the wounded heart of your Clarissa,
how balmy, are the assurances of your continued
Love and Favour! —Love me, my dear
mamma Norton, continue to love me, to the end! 
—I now think, that I may, without presumption,
promise to deserve your Love to the end. And when
I am gone, cherish my memory in your worthy heart; 
for in so doing you will cherish the memory of one
who loves and honours you more than she can express. 
But when I am no more, get over, I charge you,
as soon as you can, the smarting pangs of grief that
will attend a recent loss; and let all be early turned
into that sweetly-melancholy Regard to Memory,
which, engaging us to forget all faults, and to remember
nothing but what was thought amiable,
gives more pleasure than pain to survivors—Especially
if they can comfort themselves with the humble
hope, that the Divine mercy has taken the dear departed
to itself. 
And what is the space of time to look backward
upon, between an early departure and the longest
survivance? —And what the consolation attending the
sweet hope of meeting again, never more to be separated,
never more to be pained, grieved, or
aspersed! —But mutually blessing, and being blessed,
to all Eternity! 
In the contemplation of this happy State, in which
I hope, in God's good time, to rejoice with you,
my beloved Mrs. Norton, and also with my dear
relations, all reconciled to, and blessing the child
against whom they are now so much incensed, I
conclude myself. 
Your ever-dutiful and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 