


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Clementina. 


London, Monday, Sept. 18–29. 
What can I say, most excellent of women, to
the contents of the Letter you have honoured
me with? What a task have you imposed upon me! 
You take great, and, respecting your intentions, I will
call it, kind care, to let me know that I can have no
interest in the decision of the case you refer to me. I
repeat my humble acquiescence; but must again declare,
that it would have been next to impossible to
do so, had you not made a point of conscience of your
scruples. 
But what weight is my advice likely to have with a
young Lady, who repeatedly, in the close of her Letter,
desires me not to give it for her parents? 
I, madam, am far from being unprejudiced in this
case. For can the man who once himself hoped for 

the honour of your hand, advise you against Marriage? 
—Are not your parents generously indulgent,
when they name not any particular person to you? I
applaud both their wisdom and their goodness, on this
occasion. Possibly, you guess the man whom they
would recommend to your choice: And I am sure,
Lady Clementina would not refuse their recommendation
merely because it was theirs. Nor indeed upon
any less reason than an unconquerable aversion, or a
preference to some other Catholic. A Protestant, it
seems, it cannot be. 
But let me ask my Sister, my Friend, What answer
can I return to the Lady who had shewn, in one instance,
that she had not an insuperable aversion to
Matrimony; yet on conscientious reasons refusing one
man, and not particularly favouring any, can scruple
to oblige (obey is not the word they use) ‘a Father,
who with tears in his eyes beseeches her; a Mother
who gently reminds her of what she has suffered for
her; who declares, that it is in her power to make
the rest of her days happy; and who urges a still
stronger plea respecting them both, and the whole
family, to engage the attention of the beloved
daughter? —O madam, what pleas are those (Let
me still make use of your own pathetic words)
from a Father whose eyes plead more strongly than
words! and from a Mother, over whose bright days
you had (tho' involuntarily) cast a cloud! —Your
Brother the Bishop, a man of piety; your Confessor,
a man of equal piety; your two other Brothers,
your disinterested Friend Mrs. Beaumont; 
your faithful Camilla;’ all wholly disinterested. — 
What an enumeration against yourself. —Forbidden,
as I am, to give the cause against you, what can I
say? Dearest Lady Clementina, can I, on your own
representation, give it for you? 
You know, madam, the sacrifice I have made to
the plea of your conscience, not my own. I make 

no doubt, but parents so indulgent as yours will yield
to your reasons, if you can plead conscience against the
performance of the filial duty; the more a duty, as it
is so gently urged: Nay, hardly urged; but by tears,
and wishes, which the eyes, not the lips, express; 
and which if you will perform, your parents will think
themselves under an obligation to their child. 
Lady Clementina is one of the most generous of women:
But consider, madam, in this instance of prefering
your own will to that of the most indulgent of parents,
whether there is not an apparent selfishness, inconsistent
with your general character, even were you to
be as happy in a convent, as you propose. Would you
not, in that case, live to yourself, and renounce your
parents and family, as parts of that world which you
would vow to despise? —Dear Lady! I asked you once
before, Is there any-thing sinful in a Sacrament? 
Such all good Catholics deem Matrimony. And shall
I ask you, Whether, as self-denial is held to be meritorious
in your church, there is not a merit in denying
yourself in the case before us, when you can, by performing
the filial duty, oblige your whole family? 
Permit me to say, that, tho' a Protestant, I am not
an enemy to such foundations in general. I could
wish, under proper regulations, that we had Nunneries
among us. I would not, indeed, have the obligation
upon Nuns be perpetual: Let them have liberty,
at the end of every two or three years, to renew
their vows, or otherwise, by the consent of friends. 
Celibacy in the Clergy is an indispensable law of your
church: Yet a Cardinal has been allowed to lay down
the purple, and marry. You know, madam, I must
mean Ferdinand of Medicis. Family-reasons, in that
case, preponderated, as well at Rome, as at Florence. 
Of all the women I know, Lady Clementina della
Porretta should be the last who should be earnest to
take the veil. There can be but two persons in the
world, besides herself, who will not be grieved at her 

choice. We know their reasons. The will of her
grandfathers, now with God, is against her; and her
living parents, and every other person of her family,
those two excepted, would be made unhappy, if she
sequestred herself from the world, and them. Clementina
has charity: She wishes, she once said, to
take a great revenge upon Laurana. Laurana has
something to repent of: Let her take the veil. The
fondness she has for the world, a fondness which could
make her break through all the ties of relation and
humanity, requires a check: But are any of those in
convents more pious, more exemplarily pious, than
Clementina is, out of them? 
Much more could I urge on the same side of the
question; but what I have urged has been a task upon
me; a task which I could not have performed, had I
not preferred to my own, the happiness of you and your
family. 
May both earthly and heavenly blessings attend
your determination, whatever it be, prays, dearest
madam, 
Your ever-faithful Friend,
Affectionate Brother, and
Humble Servant,
Ch. Grandison. 

