



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, June 26. 
Thou wilt see the situation I am in with Miss
Harlowe by the inclosed copies of Three Letters; 

to Two of which I am so much scorned as not to have
one word given me in answer; and of the Third (now
sent by the messenger who brings thee this) I am afraid
as little notice will be taken—And if so, her Day of
Grace is absolutely over. 
One would imagine (so long used to constraint too
as she has been) that she might have been satisfied with
the Triumph she had over us all on Friday night: A
Triumph that to this hour has sunk my pride and my
vanity so much, that I almost hate the words, Plot,
Contrivance, Scheme; and shall mistrust myself in
future, for every one that rises to my inventive head. 
But seest thou not, that I am under a necessity to
continue her at Sinclair's, and to prohibit all her correspondences? 
Now, Belford, as I really, in my present mood,
think of nothing less than marrying her, if she let not
Thursday slip; I would have thee attend her, in pursuance
of the intimation I have given her in my Letter
of this date; and vow for me, swear for me, bind
thy soul to her for my Honour, and use what arguments
thy friendly heart can suggest, in order to procure
me an answer from her; which, as thou wilt see,
she may give in Four words only. And then I purpose
to leave Lord M. (dangerously ill as he is) and
meet her at her appointed Church, in order to solemnize: 
If she will sign but Cl. H. to thy writing the
Four words, that shall do; for I would not come up
to be made a fool of in the face of all my family and
friends. 
If she should let the day go off;—I shall be desperate. 
I am entangled in my own devices, and cannot
bear that she should detect me. 
O that I had been honest! —What a devil are all
my plots come to! What do they end in, but one
grand plot upon myself, and a title to eternal infamy
and disgrace! But, depending on thy friendly offices,
I will say no more of this. —Let her send me but one 

line! —But one line! —To treat me as unworthy of
her notice; yet be altogether in my power—I cannot
—I will not bear that. 
My Lord, as I said, is extremely ill. The doctors
give him over. He gives himself over. Those who
would not have him die, are afraid he will die. But
as to myself, I am doubtful: For these long and violent
struggles between the Constitution and the Disease
(tho' the latter has three physicians and an apothecary
to help it forward, and all three, as to their prescriptions,
of different opinions too) indicate a plaguy
tough habit, and favour more of recovery than death: 
And the more so, as he has no sharp or acute mental
organs to whet out his bodily ones, and to raise his
fever above the symptomatic helpful one. 
Thou wilt see in the inclosed what pains I am at to
dispatch messengers; who are constantly on the road
to meet each other, and one of them to link in the
chain with a fourth, whose station is in London, and
five miles onward, or till met. But, in truth, I have
some other matters for them to perform at the same
time, with my Lord's Banker and his Lawyer; which
will enable me, if his Lordship is so good as to die
this bout, to be an over-match for some of my other
relations. I don't mean Charlotte and Patty; for they
are noble girls; but others, who have been scratching
and clawing under-ground like so many moles in my
absence; and whose workings I have discovered since
I have been down, by the little heaps of dirt they have
thrown up. 
A speedy account of thy commission, dear Jack! 
The Letter travels all night. 