


Miss Boyron. In Continuation. 


Thursday, Feb. 2. 
The very next morning Sir Rowland himself paid
his respects to Mr. Reeves. 
The Knight, before he would open himself very
freely as to the business he came upon, desired that
he might have an opportunity to see me. I knew nothing
of him, nor of his business. We were just going
to breakfast. Miss Allestree, Miss Bramber, and
Miss Dolyns, a young lady of merit, were with us. 

Just as we had taken our seats, Mr. Reeves introduced
Sir Rowland, but let him not know which was
Miss Byron. He did nothing at first sitting down,
but peer in our faces by turns; and fixing his eye
upon Miss Allestree, he jogged Mr. Reeves with his
elbow—Hay, Sir?—audibly whispered he. 
Mr. Reeves was silent. Sir Rowland, who is short-sighted,
then look'd under his bent brows, at Miss
Bramber; then at Miss Dolyns; and then at me— 
Hay, Sir? whispered he again. 
He sat out the first dish of tea with an impatience
equal, as it seemed, to his uncertainty. And at last
taking Mr. Reeves by one of his buttons, desired a
word with him. They withdrew together; and the
Knight not quitting hold of Mr. Reeves's button,
Ads-my-life, Sir, said he, I hope I am right. I love
my Nephew as I love myself. I live but for him. He
ever was dutiful to me his Uncle. If that be Miss
Byron who sits on the right-hand of your Lady, with
the countenance of an angel, her eyes sparkling with
good humour, and blooming as a May-morning, the
business is done. I give my consent. Altho' I heard
not a word pass from her lips, I am sure she is all intelligence. 
My boy shall have her. The other young
ladies are agreeable: But if this be the lady my kinsman
is in love with, he shall have her. How will she
outshine all our Caermarthen Ladies; and yet we
have charming girls in Caermarthen! —Am I, or am I
not right, Mr. Reeves, as to my Nephew's flame, as
they call it? 
The lady you describe, Sir Rowland, is Miss
Byron. 
And then Mr. Reeves, in his usual partial manner,
let his heart overflow at his lips in my favour. 
Thank God, thank God! said the Knight. Let
us return. Let us go in again. I will say something
to her to make her speak. But not a word to dash
her. I expect her voice to be music, if it be as harmonious 

as the rest of her. By the softness or harshness
of the voice, let me tell you, Mr. Reeves, I form
a judgment of the heart, and soul, and manners of a
Lady. 'Tis a criterion, as they call it, of my own; 
and I am hardly ever mistaken. Let us go in again,
I pray ye. 
They returned, and took their seats; the Knight
making an aukward apology for taking my Cousin
out. 
Sir Rowland, his forehead smoothed, and his face
shining, sat swelling, as big with meaning, yet not
knowing how to begin. Mrs. Reeves and Miss Allestree
were talking at the re-entrance of the gentlemen. Sir
Rowland thought he must say something, however
distant from his main purpose. Breaking silence therefore; 
You, ladies, seemed to be deep in discourse when
we came in. Whatever were your subject, I beg you
will resume it. 
They had finished, they assured him, what they had
to say. 
Sir Rowland seemed still at a loss. He hemm'd three
times; and look'd at me with particular kindness. 
Mr. Reeves then, in pity to his fulness, asked him how
long he proposed to stay in town? 
He had thought, he said, to have set out in a week; 
but something had happened, which he believed could
not be completed under a fortnight. Yet I want to
be down, said he; for I had just finished, as I came
up, the new-built house I design to present to my
Nephew when he marries. I pretend, plain man as
I am, to be a judge, both of taste and elegance. Sir
Rowland was now set a going. All I wish for is to
see him happily settled. Ah, ladies! that I need not
go further than this table for a wife for my boy? 
We all smiled, and look'd upon each other. 
You young ladies, proceeded he, have great advantages
in certain cases over us men; and this (which
I little thought of till it came to be my own case) 

whether we speak for our kindred or for ourselves. 
But will you, Madam, to Mrs. Reeves, will you, Sir,
to Mr. Reeves, answer my questions—as to these
ladies? —I must have a Niece among them. My
Nephew, tho' I say it, is one whom any lady may
love. And as for fortune, let me alone to make him,
in addition to his own, all clear as the sun, worthy
of any woman's acceptance, tho' she were a Duchess. 
We were all silent, and smiled upon one another. 
What I would ask then, is, Which of the ladies
before me—Mercy! I believe by their smiling, and
by their pretty looks, they are none of them engaged. 
I will begin with the young lady on your right-hand. 
She locks so lovely, so good-natur'd, and so condescending! 
—Mercy! what an open forehead! —Hem! 
—Forgive me, Madam; but I believe you would not
disdain to answer my question yourself. —Are you,
Madam, are you absolutely and bona fide, disengaged?
or are you not? 
As this, Sir Rowland, answer'd I, is a question I
can best resolve, I frankly own, that I am disengaged. 
Charming! charming! Mercy! Why now what a
noble frankness in that answer! —No jesting matter! 
You may smile, ladies. —I hope, Madam, you say
true. I hope I may rely upon it, that your affections
are not engaged. 
You may, Sir Rowland. I do not love, even in
jest, to tell fibs. 
Admirable! But let me tell you Madam, that I
hope you will not many days have this to say. Ad's-my-life!
sweet soul! how I rejoice to see that charming
flush in the finest cheek in the world! But
heaven forbid that I should dash so sweet a creature! — 
Well, but now there is no going further. Excuse me,
ladies; I mean not a slight to any of you: But
now, you know, there is no going further:—And
will you, Madam, permit me to introduce to you, as
a Lover, as an humble Servant, a very proper and 

agreeable young man? Let me introduce him: He is
my Nephew. Your looks are all graciousness. Perhaps
you have seen him: And if you are really disengaged,
you can have no objection to him; of that I
am confident. And I am told, that you have nobody
that either can or will controul you. 
The more controulable for that very reason, Sir
Rowland. 
Ad's-my-life, I like your answer. Why, Madam,
you must be full as good as you look to be. I wish I
were a young man myself for your sake! But tell me,
Madam, will you permit a visit from my Nephew this
afternoon? —Come, come, dear young lady, be as
gracious as you look to be. Fortune must do. Had
you not a shilling, I should rejoice in such a Niece:
And that is more than I ever said in my life before. 
My Nephew is a sober man, a modest man. He has
a good estate of his own: A clear 2000l. a year. 
I will add to it in my life-time as much more. Be all
this good company witnesses for me. I am no flincher. 
It is well known that the word of Sir Rowland Meredith
is as good as his bond at all times. I love these
open doings. I love to be above-board. What signifies
shilly-shally? What says the old proverb? 

Happy's the wooing
That is not long a doing.

But, Sir Rowland, said I, there are proverbs that
may be set against your proverb. You hint that I
have seen the gentleman: Now I have never yet seen
the man whose addresses I could encourage. 
O, I like you the better for that. None but the
giddy love at first sight. Ad's-my-life, you would
have been snapt up before now, young as you are,
could you easily have returned love for love. Why,
Madam, you cannot be above sixteen? 
O, Sir Rowland, you are mistaken. Chearfulness,
and a contented mind, make a difference to advantage 

of half a dozen years at any time. I am much
nearer twenty-one than nineteen, I assure you. 
Nearer to twenty-one than nineteen, and yet so freely
tell your age without asking! 
Miss Byron, Sir Rowland, said Mrs. Reeves, is
young enough at twenty, surely, to own her age. 
True, Madam; but at twenty, if not before, time
always stands still with women. A lady's age once
known, will be always remembred; and that more
for spite than love. At twenty-eight or thirty, I believe
most ladies are willing to strike off half a dozen
years at least—And yet, and yet (smiling, and looking
arch) I have always said (pardon me, ladies) that it is
a sign, when women are so desirous to conceal their
age, that they think they shall be good for-nothing
when in years. Ah, ladies! shaking his head, and
laughing, women don't think of that. But how I
admire you, Madam, for your frankness! Would
to the Lord you were twenty-four! —I would have
no woman marry under twenty-four: And that, let
me tell you, ladies, for the following reasons—standing
up, and putting the fore-finger of his right-hand,
extended with a flourish, upon the thumb of his left. 
O, Sir Rowland! I doubt not but you can give very
good reasons. And I assure you, I intend not to
marry on the wrong side, as I call it, of twenty-four. 
Admirable, by Mercy! but that won't do neither. 
The man lives not, young lady, who will stay your
time, if he can have you at his. I love your noble
frankness. Then such sweetness of countenance (sitting
down, and audibly whispering, and jogging my Cousin
with his elbow) such dove-like eyes, daring to tell
all that is in the honest heart! —I am a physiognomist,
Madam (raising his voice to me). Ad's-my-life, you
are a perfect paragon! Say you will encourage my
boy, or you'll be worse off; for (standing up again)
I will come and court you myself. A good estate gives 

a man confidence; and when I set about it—Hum!— 
(one hand stuck in his side; flourishing with the other)
no woman yet, I do assure you,—ever won my heart
as you have done. 
O Sir Rowland, I thought you were too wise to
be swayed by first impressions: None but the giddy,
you know, love at first sight. 
Admirable! admirable indeed! I knew you had
wit at will; and I am sure you have wisdom. Know
you, Ladies, that wit and wisdom are too different
things, and are very rarely seen together? Plain man
as I appear to be (looking on himself first on one side,
then on the other, and unbuttoning his coat two buttons
to let a gold braid appear upon his waistcoat) I
can tell ye, I have not lived all this time for nothing. 
I am considered in Wales—Hem! —But I will not
praise myself. —Ad's-my-life! how do this young
lady's perfections run me all into tongue! —But I see
you all respect her as well as I; so I need not make
apology to the rest of you young ladies, for the distinction
paid to her. I wish I had as many nephews as
there are ladies of ye disengaged: By Mercy, we
would be all of kin. 
Thank you, Sir Rowland, said each of the young
ladies, smiling and diverted at his oddity. 
But as to my observation, continued the Knight,
that none but the giddy love at first sight, there is no
general rule, without exception, you know: Every
man must love you at first sight. Do I not love you
myself? and yet never did I see you before, nor any
body like you. 
You know not what you do, Sir Rowland, to
raise thus the vanity of a poor girl. How may you
make conceit and pride run away with her, till she
become contemptible for both in the eye of every person
whose good opinion is worth cultivating? 
Ad's-my-life, that's prettily said! But let me tell
you, that the she who can give this caution in the 

midst of her praisings, can be in no danger of being
run away with by her vanity. Why, Madam! you
extort praises from me! I never ran on so glibly in
praise of mortal woman before. You must cease to
look, to smile, to speak, I can tell you, if you would
have me cease to praise you! 
'Tis well you are not a young man, Sir Rowland,
said Miss Allestree. You seem to have the art of engaging
a woman's attention. You seem to know
how to turn her own artillery against her; and as
your sex generally do, to raise her up, in order to pull
her down. 
Why, Madam, I must own, that we men live to
sixty, before we know how to deal with you ladies,
or with the world either; and then we are not fit to
engage with the one, and are ready to quit the other. 
An old head upon a young pair of shoulders would
make rare work among ye. But to the main point
(looking very kindly on me) I ask no questions about
you, Madam. Fortune is not to be mentioned. I
want you not to have any. Not that the lady is the
worse for having a fortune: And a man may stand a
chance for as good a wife among those who have
fortunes, as among those who have none. I adore
you for your frankness of heart. Be all of a piece
now, I beseech you. You are disengaged, you say:
Will you admit of a visit from my Nephew? My
boy may be bashful. True Love is always modest
and diffident. You don't look as if you would dislike
a man for being modest. And I will come along
with him myself. 
And then the old Knight look'd important, as one
who if he lent his head to his Nephew's shoulders,
had no doubt of succeeding. 
What, Sir Rowland! admit of a visit from your
Nephew, in order to engage him in a three years courtship? 
I have told you that I intend not to marry till
I am twenty-four. 

Twenty-four, I must own, is the age of marriage
I should choose for a lady; and for the reasons aforesaid. 
—But, now I think of it, I did not tell you my
reasons—These be they—Down went his cup and
sawcer; up went his left-hand ready spread, and his
crooked finger of his right-hand, as ready to enumerate. 
No doubt, Sir Rowland, you have very good reasons. 
But, Madam, you must hear them—And I shall
prove— 
I am convinced, Sir Rowland, that twenty-four
is an age early enough. 
But I shall prove, Madam, that you at twenty, or
at twenty-one— 
Enough! enough! Sir Rowland: What need of
proof when one is convinc'd? 
But you know not, Madam, what I was driving
at— 
Well but, Sir Rowland, said Miss Bramber, will
not the reasons you could give for the proper age at
twenty-four, make against your wishes in this case? 
They will make against them, Madam, in general
cases. But in this particular case they will make for
me. For the lady before me is— 
Not in my opinion, perhaps, Sir Rowland, will
your reasons make for you: And then your exception
in my favour will signify nothing. And besides, you
must know, that I never can accept of any compliment
that is made me at the expence of my sex. 
Well then, Madam, I hope you forbid me in favour
to my plea. You are loth to hear any thing for twenty-four
against twenty-one, I hope? 
That is another point, Sir Rowland. 
Why, Madam, you seem to be afraid of hearing
my reasons. No man living knows better than I,
how to behave in ladies company. I believe I should
not be so little of a gentleman, as to offend the nicest 

ear. No need indeed! no need indeed! looking archly; 
ladies on certain subjects are very quick.— 
That is to say, Sir Rowland, interrupted Mrs. Reeves,
that modesty is easily alarmed. 
If any thing is said, or implied, upon certain subjects
that you would not be thought to understand, ladies
know how to be ignoraut. And then he laughed. 
Undoubtedly, Sir Rowland, said I, such a company
as this, need not be apprehensive, that a gentleman
like you, should say any thing unsuitable to it. But
do you really think affected ignorance can be ever
graceful, or a proof of true delicacy? Let me rather
say, That a woman of virtue would be wanting to
her character, if she had not courage enough to express
her resentment of any discourse, that is meant as an
insult upon modesty. 
Admirably said again! But men will sometimes
forget, that there are ladies in company. 
Very favourably put for the men, Sir Rowland. 
But pardon me, if I own, that I should have a mean
opinion of a man, who allowed himself to talk even
to men what a woman might not hear. A pure heart,
whether in man or woman, will be always, in every
company, on every occasion, pure. 
Ad's-my-life, you have excellent notions, Madam! 
I wanted to hear you speak just now: And now you
make me, and every one else, silent—Twenty-one!
why what you say would shame Sixty-one. You must
have kept excellent company all your life! —Mercy!
if ever I heard the like from a lady so young! —What
a glory do you reflect back upon all who had any
hand in your education! Why was I not born within
the past thirty years? I might then have had some
hopes of you myself! —And this brings me to my former
subject, of my Nephew—But, Mr. Reeves, one
word with you, Mr. Reeves. I beg your pardon,
ladies. But the importance of the matter will excuse 

me: And I must get out of town as soon as I can. — 
One word with you, Mr. Reeves. 
The gentlemen withdrew together: For breakfast
by this time was over. And then the Knight open'd
all his heart to Mr. Reeves, and besought his interest. 
He would afterwards have obtained an audience, as
he called it, of me. But the three young ladies having
taken leave of us, and Mrs. Reeves and I being
retired to dress, I desired to be excused. 
He then desired leave to attend me to-morrow evening:
But Mr. Reeves pleading engagements till Monday
evening, he besought him to indulge him with his
interest in that long gap of time, as he called it, and
for my being then in the way. 
And thus, Lucy, have I given you an ample account
of what has passed with regard to this new servant,
as gentlemen call themselves, in order to become
our masters. 
'Tis now Friday morning. We are just setting out
to dine with Lady Betty. If the day furnishes me
with any amusing materials for my next pacquet, its
agreeableness will be doubled to 
Your ever-affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

