



In Answer to the preceding. 


How you overwhelm me with your Goodness,
my dearest Lady, in every Word of your last
welcome Letter, is beyond my Power to express! 
How nobly has your Lady contrived, in your ever-valu'd 

Present, to encourage a doubting and apprehensive
Mind! And how does it contribute to my
Joy and my Glory, that I am deemed by the noble
Sister of my best Beloved, not wholly unworthy of
being the humble Means to continue, and, perhaps,
to perpetuate, a Family so antient and so honourable!–––– 
This, Madam, when I contemplate, and look upon
what I was–––What can I say!––– How shall I express
the Sense of the Honour, done me!––– And when,
skipping over for a few Moments, the other engaging
Particulars in your Ladyship's Letter, I come
to the last charming Paragraph, I am doubly affected
to see myself seemingly upbraided, but so politely
imbolden'd to assume an Appellation, that otherwise
I hardly dar'd to assume. 
I–––humble I–––who never had a Sister before! 
–––To find one now in Lady Davers! O Madam,
you, and only you, can teach me Words fit to express
the Joy and the Gratitude that fill my delighted
Heart!––– But thus much I am taught, and thus
much I can say, tho' at a Loss for other Words, that
there is something more than the Low-born can
imagine in Birth and Education. This is so evident
in your Lady's Actions, Words, and Manner,
that it strikes one with a becoming Reverence; 
and we look up with Awe to a Condition we emulate
in vain, when raised by partial Favour, like what I
have found; and are confounded, when we see Grandeur
of Soul join'd with Grandeur of Birth and
Condition; and a noble Lady acting thus nobly, as
Lady Davers acts. 
My best Wishes, and a thousand Blessings, attend
your Ladyship in all you undertake! And I am persuaded
the latter will, and a Peace and Satisfaction
of Mind incomparably to be preferr'd to whatever
else this World can afford, in the new Regulations, 

which you, and my dear Lady Countess, have set
on Foot in your Families: And when I can have the
Happiness to know what they are, I shall, I am confident,
greatly improve my own Methods by them. 
Were we to live for ever in this Life, we might be
careless and indifferent about these Matters; but
when such an Uncertainty as to the Time, and such
a Certainty as to the Event, is before us, a prudent
Mind will be always preparing, till prepared; and
what can be a better Preparative, than charitable
Actions to our Fellow-creatures in the Eye of that
Majesty, which wants nothing of us himself, but to
do just and merciful Things to one another? Pardon
me, my dearest Lady, for this my free Style. 
Methinks I am out of myself; I know not how to
descend all at once from the Height to which you
have raised me: And you must forgive the Reflections
to which you yourself, and your own noble
Actions, have given Birth! 
Here, having taken Respite a little, I find I naturally
enough sink into Body again.––– And will not your
Ladyship confine your Expectations from me within
narrower Limits?––– I hope you will.––– For, Oh!
my excellent Lady, I cannot, even with my Wishes,
so swiftly follow your Expectations, if such they
are! But, however, leaving Futurity to Him, who
only can govern Futurity, and who conducts us all,
and our Affairs, as shall best answer his own Divine
Purposes, I will proceed, as well as I can, to obey
your Ladyship in those Articles, which are, at present,
more within my own Power. 
My dear Miss Darnford, then, let me acquaint
your Ladyship, arrived here on Thursday last: She
had given us Notice, by a Line, of the Day she
set out; and Sir Simon and Lady Darnford saw her
Ten Miles on the Way to the Stage-coach in Sir 

Simon's Coach, Mr. Murray attending her on Horseback; 
they parted with her, as was easy to guess
from her Merit, with great Tenderness; and we
are to look upon the Visit, (as we do) as a high
Favour from her Papa and Mamma; who, however,
charge her not to exceed a Month in and out,
which I regret much. Mr. B. kindly proposed to
me, as Miss came in the Stage-coach, attended with
one Maid-servant, to meet her Part of the Way in
his Coach and Six, if, as he was pleased to say, it
would not be too fatiguing to me; and we would
go so early, as to dine at St. Albans. I gladly consented,
and we got thither about One o'Clock,
attended by Mr. Colbrand, Abraham and John; and
while Dinner was preparing, he was pleased to shew
me the great Church there, and the curious Vault
of the Good Duke of Gloucester, and also the Monument
of the Great Lord Chancellor Bacon in St.
Michael's Church; all which, no doubt, your
Ladyship has seen. 
There happen'd to be Six Passengers in the Stage-coach,
and Miss was exceedingly glad to be relieved
from them, tho' the Weather was cold enough, Two
of the Passengers being not very agreeable Company,
one a rough military Man, the other a positive
humoursome old Gentlewoman; and the other
Two, not such as she had Reason to regret parting
with; Two Sisters, who jangled now-and-then,
said Miss, as much as my Sister, and my Sister's
Sister. 
Your Ladyship will judge how joyful this Meeting
was to Miss and to me. Mr. B. was no less
delighted, and said, He was infinitely obliged to Sir
Simon for this precious Trust. 
Miss said, I came with double Pleasure to see the
greatest Curiosity in England, an Husband and a
Wife, who have not, in so many Months, that you 

have been marry'd, if I may believe Report, and
your Letters, Mrs. B. once repented. You are
severe, Miss, said Mr. B. upon People in the marry'd
State: I hope there are many such Instances. 
There might, said she, if there were more such
Husbands as Mr. B. makes.–––– Oh! you are a
charming Man!––– I hated you once, and I thought
you very wicked; but I revere you now. 
If you will revere any body, my dear Miss, said
he, let it be this good Girl; for it is all owing to
her Conduct and Discretion, that I make a tolerable
Husband: Were there more such Wives, I am
persuaded, there would be more such Husbands, than
there are. 
You see, my dear Miss, said I, what it is to
be wedded to a generous Mind! Mr. B. by his
noble Treatment of me, creates a Merit in me,
and disclaims the natural Effects of his own Goodness. 
Well, you're a charming Couple–––Person and
Mind, I know not any Equal either of you have. 
–––But, Mr. B. I will not compliment you too
highly. I may make you proud, for Men are saucy
Creatures; but I cannot make your Lady so: And
in this Doubt of the one, and Confidence in the
other, I must join with you, that her Merit is the
greatest––––Since, excuse me, bold Gentleman, as
I know you have been! her Example has reformed
her Rake; and you have only confirm'd in her the
Virtues you found ready formed to your Hand. 
That Distinction, said Mr. B. is worthy of Miss
Darnford's Judgment. 
My dearest Miss, my dearest Mr. B. said I, takeing
each by the Hand, how can you go on thus!
–––– As I look upon every kind thing, Two such dear
Friends say to me, as Incentives for me, to endeavour
to deserve them, you must not task me too 

high; for then, instead of encouraging, you'll give
me Despair. 
The dear Gentleman clasped us both in his Arms,
and saluted each–––––––––And called us his Two Nonpareils. 
He led us into the Coach, placing Miss and me
on the Front-seat, and himself on the other, with
Miss's Maid-servant, a genteel, prudent young Body,
whom her Lady would fain have left in the Stage,
to avoid the Honour of sitting with Mr. B. And
in a free, easy, joyful Manner, not in the least tir'd
or fatigu'd, did we reach the Town and Mr. B.'s
House; with which, and its Furniture, and the
Apartments allotted for her, Miss is highly pleased. 
But the dear Lady put me into some little Confusion,
when she saw me first, taking Notice of my
Improvements, as she called them, before Mr. B. 
I look'd at him, and look'd at her–––––––––Dear Miss!
said I, with a blushing Cheek and down-cast Eye. 
He smiled at Miss, and said, Would you, my good
Miss, look so silly, after such a Length of Time,
with an Husband you had no Occasion to be asham'd
of?––––––––– No, indeed, Sir, not I, I'll assure you; nor
will I forgive those Maiden Airs in a Wife so happy
as you are. I said nothing. But I wish'd myself, in
Mind and Behaviour, to be just what Miss Darnford
is. 
But, my dear Lady, Miss Darnford has had those
early Advantages from Conversation, which I had
not; and so I must never expect to know how to
deport myself with that modest Freedom and Ease,
which, altho' some of my Favourers attribute to me,
yet I know I want, and shall always want. For, I
am every Day more and more sensible of the great
Difference there is in being us'd to the politest
Conversation as an Inferior, and in being born to 

bear a Part in it: In the one, all is set, stiff, aukward,
and the Person just such an Ape of Imitation
as poor I. In the other, all is natural Ease and
Sweetness–––like Miss Darnford.––––– 
Knowing this, I don't indeed aim at what I am
sensible I cannot attain; and so, I hope, am less
exposed to Ridicule, than I should be, if I did. For,
I have heard Mr. B. observe with regard to Gentlemen
who build fine Houses, and make fine Gardens,
and open fine Prospects, that Art should never take
place of, but be subservient to Nature; and a
Gentleman, if he is confin'd to a Situation, had better
conform his Designs to that, than to do as at
Chatsworth was done, that is to say, level a Mountain
at a monstrous Expence; which, had it been suffered
to remain, in so wild and romantick a Scene
as Chatsworth affords, might have been made one
of the greatest Beauties of the Place. 
So I, Madam, think I had better endeavour to
make the best of those natural Defects I cannot
master, than by assuming Airs and Dignities in
Appearance, to which I was not born, act neither
Part tolerably. By this means, instead of being thought
neither Gentlewoman nor Rustick, as Sir Jacob
hinted, (Linsey-wolsey, I think, was his Term too) I
may be look'd upon as an Original in my Way; and
all Originals pass Muster well enough, you know,
Madam, even with Judges. 
Now I am upon this Subject, I can form to
myself, if your Ladyship will excuse me, two such
polite Gentlemen, as my Lawyers, mention'd in
my former, who, with a true London Magnanimity
and Penetration,–––––––(For, Madam, I
fansy your London Criticks will be the severest
upon the Country Girl) will put on mighty significant
Looks, forgetting, may-be, they have any
Faults themselves, and apprehending they have 

nothing to do, but to sit in Judgment upon others,
expressing themselves after this manner: “Why,
truly, Jack, the Girl is well enough!–––considering
–––I can't say”–––(then a Pinch of Snuff, perhaps,
adds Importance to their Air) “but a Man
might love her for a Month or two.” (These Sparks
talk'd in this manner of other Ladies before me)––– 
She behaves better than I expected from her––– 
considering”–––again will follow–––“So I think,
cries the other; and tosses his Tye behind him with
an Air partly of Contempt, and partly of Rakery. 
“–––As you say, Jemmy, I expected to find an
aukward Country Girl; but she tops her Part,
I'll assure ye!––– Nay, for that matter, behaves
very tolerably for what she was–––And is right,
not to seem desirous to drown the Remembrance
of her Original in her Elevation–––And, I can't
but say”–––(for something like it they did say) “is
mighty pretty, and passably genteel.” And thus,
with their poor Praise of Mr. B.'s Girl, they think
they have made a fine Compliment to his Judgment. 
But for his sake–––for as to my own, I am not
solicitous about such Gentlemens good Opinions, I
owe them a Spite; and believe, I shall find an Opportunity
to come out of their Debt. For I have the
Vanity to think, now your Ladyship has made me
proud by your kind Incouragements and Approbation,
that the Country Girl will make 'em look about
'em with all their genteel Contempts, which they
miscal Praise. 
But how I run on! Your Ladyship expects me
to write as freely, as I used to do to my Parents. 
I have the Merit of obeying you, that I have; 
but, I doubt, too much to the Exercise of your
Patience. This (like all mine) is a long Letter; and
I will only add to it Miss Darnford's humble Respects 

and Thanks for your Ladyship's kind Mention of her,
which she receives as no small Honour. 
And now, Madam, with a greater Pleasure than I
can express, will I make use of the Liberty your
Ladyship so kindly allows me to take, of subscribing
myself, with that profound Respect which becomes
me, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

Mr. Adams, Mr. Longman, and Mrs. Jervis,
are just arrived; and our Houshold is now
complete. 
