



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday, June 29. 
Thou hast heard from McDonald and Mowbray
the news. Bad or good, I know not which
thou'lt deem it. I only wish I could have given thee
joy upon the same account, before the unhappy Lady
was seduced from Hamstead: For then of what an
ungrateful villainy hadst thou been spared the perpetration,
which now thou hast to answer for! 
I came to town purely to serve thee with her, expecting
that thy next would satisfy me that I might
endeavour it without dishonour: And at first when
I found her gone, I half pitied thee; for now wilt
thou be inevitably blown up: And in what an execrable
light wilt thou appear to all the world! —Poor
Lovelace! Caught in thy own snares! Thy punishment
is but beginning! 
But to my Narrative; for I suppose thou expectest
all particulars from me, since Mowbray has informed
thee that I have been collecting them. 
‘The noble Exertion of Spirit she had made on
Friday night, had, it seems, greatly disordered her; 
insomuch that she was not visible till Saturday evening; 
when Mabell saw her; and she seemed to be
very ill: But on Sunday morning, having dressed
herself, as if designing to go to church, she ordered
Mabell to get her a coach to the door. 
‘The wench told her, She was to obey her in
every-thing but the calling of a coach or chair, or
in relation to Letters. 
‘She sent for Will. and gave him the same command. 
‘He pleaded his master's orders to the contrary,
and desired to be excused. 

‘Upon this, down she went herself, and would
have gone out without observation: But finding the
Street-door double-locked, and the key not in the
lock, she stept into the street-parlour, and would
have thrown up the Sash to call out to the people
passing by, as they doubted not: But that, since
her last attempt of the same nature, had been fastened
down. 
‘Hereupon she resolutely stept into Mrs. Sinclair's
parlour in the back-house; where were the old devil
and her two partners; and demanded the key of the
street-door, or to have it opened for her. 
‘They were all surprised; but desired to be excused,
and pleaded your orders. 
‘She asserted, that you had no authority over her; 
and never should have any: That their present refusal
was their own act and deed: She saw the intent
of their back-house, and the reason of putting her
there: She pleaded her condition and fortune; and
said, They had no way to avoid utter ruin, but by
opening their doors to her, or by murdering her,
and burying her in their garden or cellar, too deep
for detection: That already what had been done to
her was punishable by death: And bid them at their
peril detain her.’ 
What a noble, what a right Spirit has this charming
creature, in cases that will justify an Exertion of
Spirit!— 
‘They answered, That Mr. Lovelace could prove
his Marriage, and would indemnify them. And
they all would have vindicated their behaviour on
Friday night, and the reputation of their house: But
refusing to hear them on that topic, she flung from
them, threatening. 
‘She then went up half a dozen stairs in her way to
her own apartment: But, as if she had bethought
herself, down she stept again, and proceeded towards
the Street-parlour; saying, as she passed by the infamous 

famous Dorcas, I'll make myself protectors, tho'
the windows suffer: But that wench, of her own
head, on the Lady's going out of that parlour to
Mrs. Sinclair's, had locked the door, and taken out
the key: So that finding herself disappointed, she
burst into tears, and went menacing and sobbing up
stairs again. 
‘She made no other attempt till the effectual one. 
Your Letters and Messages, they supposed, coming
so fast upon one another (tho' she would not answer
one of them) gave her some amusement, and an
assurance to them, that she would at last forgive
you; and that then all would end as you wished. 
‘The women, in pursuance of your orders, offered
not to obtrude themselves upon her; and Dorcas
also kept out of her sight all the rest of Sunday; 
also on Monday and Tuesday. But by the Lady's
condescension (even to familiarity) to Mabell, they
imagined, that she must be working in her mind all
that time to get away: They therefore redoubled
their cautions to the wench: Who told them so
faithfully all that passed between her Lady and her,
that they had no doubt of her fidelity to her wicked
trust. 
‘'Tis probable she might have been contriving
something all this time; but saw no room for perfecting
any scheme: The contrivance by which she
effected her escape seems to me not to have been
fallen upon till the very day; since it depended partly
upon the weather, as it proved. But it is evident
she hoped something from Mabell's simplicity, or
gratitude, or compassion, by cultivating all the time
her civility to her. 
‘Polly waited on her early on Wednesday morning; 
and met with a better reception than she had
reason to expect. She complained however with
warmth of her confinement. Polly said, There
would be an happy end to it (if it were a confinement) 

next day, she presumed. She absolutely declared
to the contrary, in the way Polly meant it; 
and said, That Mr. Lovelace on his return [Which
looked as if she intended to wait for it] should have
reason to repent the orders he had given, as they all
should their observance of them: Let him send twenty
Letters, she would not answer one, be the consequence
what it would; nor give him hope of the
least favour, while she was in that house. She had
given Mrs. Sinclair and themselves fair warning,
she said: No orders of another ought to make them
detain a free person: But having made an open attempt
to go, and been detained by them, she was
the calmer, she told Polly; Let them look to the
consequence. 
‘But yet she spoke this with temper; and Polly
gave it as her opinion (with apprehension for their
own safety) that, having so good a handle to punish
them all, she would not go away if she might. And
what, inferred Polly, is the indemnity of a man who
has committed the vilest of Rapes on a person of condition; 
and must himself, if prosecuted for it, either
fly, or be hanged? 
‘Sinclair [So I will still call her] upon this representation
of Polly, foresaw, she said, the ruin of her
poor house in the issue of this strange business; and
the infamous Sally and Dorcas bore their parts in
the apprehension: And this put them upon thinking
it adviseable for the future, that the Street-door
should generally in the day-time be only left upon
a bolt-latch, as they called it, which any-body might
open on the inside; and that the key should be kept
in the door; that their numerous comers and goers,
as they called their guests, should be able to give
evidence, that she might have gone out if she would: 
Not forgetting, however, to renew their orders to
Will. to Dorcas, to Mabell, and the rest, to redouble
their vigilance on this occasion, to prevent 

her escape: —None of them doubting, at the same
time, that her Love of a man so considerable in
their eyes, and the prospect of what was to happen
as she had reason to believe on Thursday, her
Uncle's Birth-day, would (tho' perhaps not till the
last hour, for her Pride-sake, was their word) engage
her to change her temper. 
‘They believe, that she discovered the key to be
left in the door; for she was down more than once
to walk in the little garden, and seemed to cast her
eye each time to the Street-door. 
‘About Eight yesterday morning, an hour after
Polly had left her, she told Mabell, She was sure
she should not live long; and having a good many
suits of apparel, which after her death would be of
no use to any-body she valued, she would give her
a brown lustring gown, which, with some alterations,
to make it more suitable to her degree, would
a great while serve her for a Sunday wear; for that
she (Mabell) was the only person in that house of
whom she could think without terror or antipathy. 
‘Mabell expressing her gratitude upon the occasion,
the Lady said, She had nothing to employ
herself about; and if she could get a workwoman
directly, she would look over her things then, and
give her what she intended for her. 
‘Her mistress's manteau-maker, the maid replied,
lived but a little way off; and she doubted not that
she could procure her, or one of her journeywomen,
to alter the gown out of hand. 
‘I will give you also, said she, a quilted coat,
which will require but little alteration, if any; for
you are much about my stature: But the gown I
will give directions about, because the sleeves and
the robings and facings must be altered for your
wear, being, I believe, above your station: And
try, said she, if you can get the workwoman, and
we'll advise about it. If she cannot come now, let 

her come in the afternoon; but I had rather now,
because it will amuse me to give you a lift. 
‘Then stepping to the window, It rains, said she
[and so it had done all the morning]: Slip on the
hood and short cloak I have seen you wear, and
come to me when you are ready to go out, because
you shall bring me in something that I want. 
‘Mabell equipped herself accordingly, and received
her commands to buy her some trifles, and then left
her; but, in her way out, stept into the back parlour,
where Dorcas was with Mrs. Sinclair, telling
her where she was going, and on what account,
bidding Dorcas look out till she came back. So
faithful was the wench to the trust reposed in her,
and so little had the Lady's generosity wrought upon
her. 
‘Mrs. Sinclair commended her; Dorcas envied
her, and took her cue: And Mabell soon returned
with the manteau-maker's journeywoman (She was
resolved, she said, she would not come without her); 
and then Dorcas went off guard. 
‘The Lady looked out the gown and petticoat,
and before the workwoman caused Mabell to try it
on; and, that it might sit the better, made the
willing wench pull off her upper petticoat, and put
on that she gave her. Then she bid them go into
Mr. Lovelace's apartment, and contrive about it
before the pier-glass there, and stay till she came to
them, to give them her opinion. 
‘Mabell would have taken her own cloaths, and
hood, and short cloak with her: But her Lady said,
No matter; you may put them on again here, when
we have considered about the alterations: There's
no occasion to litter the other room. 
‘They went; and instantly, as it is supposed, she
slipt on Mabell's gown and petticoat over her own,
which was white damask, and put on the wench's
hood, short cloak, and ordinary apron, and down
she went. 

‘Hearing somebody tripping along the passage,
both Will. and Dorcas whipt to the inner-hall door,
and saw her; but, taking her for Mabell, Are you
going far, Mabell? cried Will. 
‘Without turning her face, or answering, she held
out her hand, pointing to the stairs; which they
construed as a caution for them to look out in her
absence; and supposing she would not be long gone,
as she had not in form repeated her caution to them,
up went Will. tarrying at the stairs-head in expectation
of the supposed Mabell's return. 
‘Mabell and the workwoman waited a good while,
amusing themselves not disagreeably, the one with
contriving in the way of her business, the other delighting
herself with her fine gown and coat: But at
last, wondering the Lady did not come in to them,
Mabell tiptoed it to her door, and tapping, and not
being answered, stept into the chamber. 
‘Will. at that instant, from his station at the stairshead,
seeing Mabell in her Lady's cloaths; for he
had been told of the present [Gifts to servants fly
from servant to servant in a minute] was very much
surprised, having, as he thought, just seen her go
out in her own; and stepping-up, met her at the
door. How the devil can this be? said he: Just
now you went out in your own dress! How came
you here in This? And how could you pass me unseen? 
But nevertheless, kissing her, said, He would
now brag he had kissed his Lady, or one in her
cloaths. 
‘I am glad, Mr. William, cried Mabell, to see
you here so diligently. But know you where my
Lady is? 
‘In my Master's apartment, answered Will. Is
she not? Was she not talking with you this moment? 
‘No, that's Mrs. Dolins's journeywoman. 
‘They both stood aghast, as they said; Will. again 

recollecting he had seen Mabell, as he thought, go
out in her own cloaths. And while they were debating
and wondering, up comes Dorcas with your
fourth Letter, just then brought for her Lady; and
seeing Mabell dressed out (whom she had likewise
beheld a little before, as she supposed, in her common
cloaths) she joined in the wonder; till Mabell, reentering
the Lady's apartment, missed her own
cloaths; and then suspecting what had happened,
and letting the others into the ground of her suspicion,
they all agreed, that she had certainly escaped. 
And then followed such an uproar of mutual accusation,
and You should have done this, and You should
have done that, as alarmed the whole house; every
apartment in both houses giving up its devil, to the
number of fourteen or fifteen, including the Mother
and her Partners. 
‘Will. told them his Story; and then ran out, as
on the like occasion formerly, to make enquiry whether
the Lady was seen by any of the coachmen,
chairmen, or porters, plying in that neighbourhood: 
While Dorcas cleared herself immediately, and that
at the poor Mabell's expence, who made a figure as
guilty as aukward, having on the suspected price of
her treachery; which Dorcas, out of envy, was
ready to tear from her back. 
‘Hereupon all the pack opened at the poor wench,
while the Mother, foaming at the mouth, bellowed
out her orders for seizing the suspected offender; 
who could neither be heard in her own defence, nor,
had she been heard, would have been believed. 
‘That such a perfidious wretch should ever disgrace
her house, was the Mother's cry! Good people might
be corrupted; but it was a fine thing if such a house
as hers could not be faithfully served by cursed creatures
who were hired knowing the business they were
to be employed in, and who had no pretence to
principle! —Damn her, the wretch proceeded! —She 

had no patience with her! Call the cook, and call
the scullion! 
‘They were at hand. 
‘See that guilty pyeball devil, was her word (her
Lady's gown upon her back)—But I'll punish her
for a warning to all betrayers of their trust. Put on
the great gridiron this moment [an oath or a curse
at every word]: Make up a roaring fire—The cleaver
bring me this instant—I'll cut her into quarters
with my own hands; and carbonade and broil the
traitress for a feast to all the dogs and cats in the
neighbourhood, and eat the first slice of the toad myself,
without salt or pepper. 
‘The poor Mabell, frightened out of her wits, expected
every moment to be torn in pieces, having
half a score open-clawed paws upon her all at once. 
She promised to confess all. But that All, when she
had obtained a hearing, was nothing; for nothing
had she to confess. 
‘Sally hereupon, with a curse of mercy, ordered
her to retire; undertaking that she and Polly would
examine her themselves, that they might be able to
write all particulars to his Honour; and then, if she
could not clear herself, or, if guilty, give some account
of the Lady (who had been so wicked as to
give them all this trouble) so as they might get her
again, then the cleaver and gridiron might go to
work with all her heart. 
‘The wench, glad of this reprieve, went up stairs; 
and while Sally was laying out the Law, and prating
away in her usual dictatorial manner, whipt on another
gown, and sliding down stairs, escaped to her
relations. And this flight, which was certainly
more owing to terror than guilt, was, in the true
Old Bailey construction, made a confirmation of
the latter.’ 
These are the particulars of Miss Harlowe's flight. 

Thou'lt hardly think me too minute. —How I long
to triumph over thy impatience and fury on the occasion! 
Let me beseech thee, my dear Lovelace, in thy
next Letter, to rave most gloriously! —I shall be
grievously disappointed, if thou dost not. 
Where, Lovelace, can the poor Lady be gone? 
And who can describe the distress she must be in? 
By thy former Letters, it may be supposed, that she
can have very little Money: Nor, by the suddenness
of her flight, more Cloaths than those she has on. 
And thou knowest who once said (a) , “Her Parents
will not receive her: Her Uncles will not entertain
her: Her Norton is in their direction, and cannot: 
Miss Howe dare not: She has not one friend or intimate
in town; entirely a stranger to it.” And,
let me add, has been despoiled of her Honour by the
man for whom she made all these sacrifices; and who
stood bound to her by a thousand oaths and vows, to
be her Husband, her Protector, and Friend! 
How strong must be her resentment of the barbarous
treatment she has received! How worthy of herself,
that it has made her hate the man she once loved! 
And, rather than marry him, chuse to expose her disgrace
to the whole world; to forego the Reconciliation
with her friends which her heart was so set upon; 
and to hazard a thousand evils to which her Youth
and her Sex may too probably expose an indigent and
friendless Beauty! 
Remembrest thou not that home push upon thee,
in one of the papers written in her delirium; of which
however it savours not?— 
I will assure thee, that I have very often since most
seriously reflected upon it: And as thy intended Second
Outrage convinces me, that it made no impression 

upon thee then, and perhaps thou hast never
thought of it since, I will transcribe the sentence. 
“If, as Religion teaches us, God will judge us,
in a great measure, by our benevolent or evil
actions to one another —O wretch, bethink thee,
in time bethink thee, how great must be thy condemnation (a) !” 
And is this amiable Doctrine the Sum of Religion? 
Upon my faith I believe it is. For, to indulge a serious
thought, since we are not Atheists, except in
Practice, Does God, the Being of Beings, want
any thing of us for Himself? And does he not enjoin
us Works of Mercy to one another, as the means
to obtain His mercy? A sublime principle, and
worthy of the Supreme Superintendent and
Father of all things! —But, if we are to be judged
by this noble principle, what, indeed, must be thy
condemnation on the score of this Lady only! And
what mine, and what all our Confraternity's, on the
score of other women; tho' we are none of us half so
bad as thou art, as well for want of inclination, I hope,
as of opportunity! 
I must add, that, as well for thy own sake, as for the
Lady's, I wish ye were yet to be married to each other. 
It is the only medium that can be hit upon, to salve
the Honour of both. All that's past may yet be concealed
from the world, and from her relations; and
thou mayst make amends for all her sufferings, if thou
resolvest to be a tender and kind Husband to her. 
And if this really be thy intention, I will accept,
with pleasure, of a commission from thee, that shall
tend to promote so good an end, whenever she can be
found; that is to say, if she will admit to her presence
a man who professes friendship to thee. Nor can I
give a greater demonstration, that I am 
Thy sincere Friend,
J. Belford. 

P. S. Mabell's cloaths were thrown into the passage
this morning: Nobody knows by whom. 