


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sunday Noon, Oct. 15.
We were told, there would be a crouded church
this morning, in expectation of seeing the new
humble servant of Miss Byron attending her thither:
For it is every-where known, that Sir Charles Grandison
is come down to make his addresses to the young
creature who is happy in every one's love and good 

wishes; and all is now said to have been settled between
him and us, by his noble sister, and Lord G.
and Dr. Bartlett, when they were with us. —And we
are to be married—O my dear Lady G! you cannot
imagine how soon. You see what credit you did us
by your kind visit, my dear. 
Many of the neighbourhood seemed disappointed,
when they saw me led in by my uncle, as Mr. Deane
led my aunt, and Nancy and Lucy only attended by
their brother. But it was not long before Mr. Greville,
Mr. Fenwick, and Sir Charles, entered, and
went into the pew of the former; which is overagainst
ours. Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick bowed
low to us, severally, the moment they went into the
pew, and to several others of the gentry. 
Sir Charles had first other devoirs to pay: To false
shame, you have said, he was always superior. I was
delighted to see the example he set. He paid us his
second compliments with a grace peculiar to himself. 
I felt my face glow, on the whispering that went round. 
I thought I read in every eye, admiration of him, even
through the sticks of some of the Ladies fans. 
What a difference was there between the two men
and him, in their behaviour, throughout both the service,
and sermon! Yet who ever beheld two of the
three so decent, so attentive, so reverent, I may say,
before? Were all who call themselves gentlemen
(thought I, more than once) like this, the world
would yet be a good world. 
Mr. Greville had his arm in a sling. He seemed
highly delighted with his guest; so did Mr. Fenwick. 
When the sermon was ended, Mr. Greville held the
pew-door ready opened, to attend our movements; 
and when we were in motion to go, he, taking officiously
Sir Charles's hand, bent towards us. Sir
Charles met us at our pew-door: He approached us
with that easy grace peculiar to himself, and offered,
with a profound respect, his hand to me. 

This was equal to a public declaration. It took
every-body's attention. He is not ashamed to avow
in public, what he thinks fit to own in private. 
I was humbled more than exalted by the general
notice. Mr. Greville (bold, yet low man!) made a
motion, as if he gave the hand that Sir Charles took. 
Mr. Fenwick offered his hand to Lucy. Mr. Greville
led my aunt; and not speaking low (subtle as a serpent!)
My plaguy horse, said he, looking at his sling,
knew not his master. I invite myself to tea with you,
madam, in the afternoon. You will supply my lame
arm, I hope, yourself. 
There is no such thing as keeping private one's
movements in a country-town, if one would. One
of our servants reported the general approbation. It
is a pleasure, surely, my dear Ladies, to be addressed
to by a man of whom every one approves. What a
poor figure must she make, who gives way to a courtship
from a man whom every-body blames her for
encouraging! Such women indeed generally confess
indirectly the folly, by carrying on the affair clandestinely. 
Sunday Evening. 
O my dear! I have been strangely disconcerted by
means of Mr. Greville. He is a strange man. But
I will lead to it in course. 
We all went to church again in the afternoon. 
Every-body who knew Mr. Greville, took it for a high
piece of politeness in him to his guest, that he came
twice the same day to church. Sir Charles edified
every-body by his chearful piety. Are you not of opinion,
my dear Lady G. that wickedness may be always
put out of countenance by a person who has an
established character for goodness, and who is not
ashamed of doing his duty in the public eye? Methinks
I could wish that all the profligates in the parish
had their seats around that of a man who has fortitude
enough to dare to be good. The text was a happy 

one to this purpose: The words of our Saviour:
‘Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of
him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when
he cometh in the glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels.’ 
Sir Charles conducted my aunt to her coach, as
Mr. Greville officiously, but properly for his views,
did me. We found Mr. Fenwick at Selby-house talking
to my grandmamma on the new subject. She
dined with us; but, not being very well, chose to retire
to her devotions in my closet, while we went to
church, she having been at her own in the morning. 
We all received Mr. Greville with civility. He
affects to be thought a wit, you know, and a great
joker. Some men cannot appear to advantage without
making their friend a butt to shoot at. Fenwick
and he tried to play upon each other, as usual. Sir
Charles lent each his smile; and, whatever he thought
of them, shewed not a contempt of their great-boy
snip-snap. But, at last, my grandmamma and aunt
engaged Sir Charles in a conversation, which made
the gentlemen so silent, and so attentive, that had they
not flashed a good deal at each other before, one might
have thought them a little discreet. 
Nobody took the least notice of what had passed
between Mr. Greville and Sir Charles, till Mr. Greville
touched upon the subject to me. He desired an
audience of ten minutes, as he said; and, upon his
declaration, that it was the last he would ever ask of
me on the subject; and, upon my grandmamma's saying,
Oblige Mr. Greville, my dear; I permitted him
to draw me to the window. 
His address was nearly in the following words; not
speaking so low, but every one might hear him, tho'
he said aloud, Nobody must but me: 
I must account myself very unhappy, madam, in
having never been able to incline you to shew me 

favour. You may think me vain: I believe I am so:
But I may take to myself the advantages and qualities
which every-body allows me. I have an estate that
will warrant my addresses to a woman of the first rank; 
and it is free, and unincumbered. I am not an ill-natured
man. I love my jest, 'tis true; but I love
my friend. You good women generally do not like a
man the less for having something to mend in him. I
could say a great deal more in my own behalf, but
that Sir Charles Grandison (looking at him) quite
eclipses me. Devil fetch me, if I can tell how to
think myself any-thing before him. I was always
afraid of him. But when I heard he was gone abroad,
in pursuit of a former Love, I thought I had another
chance for it. 
Yet I was half-afraid of Lord D. His mother
would manage a Machiavel. He has a great estate; 
a title; he has good qualities for a nobleman. But
when I found that you could so steadily refuse him, as
well as me; There must be some man, thought I,
who is lord of her heart. Fenwick is as sad a dog as
I; it cannot be he. Orme, poor soul! she will not
have such a milk-sop as that, neither— 
Mr. Orme, Sir, interrupted I, and was going to
praise him—But he said, I will be heard out now:
This is my dying speech; I will not be interrupted. 
Well then, Sir, smiling, come to your last words,
as soon as you can. 
I have told you, before now, Miss Byron, that I
will not bear your smiles. But now smiles or frowns,
I care not. I have no hopes left; and I am resolved
to abuse you, before I have done. 
Abuse me! I hope not, Sir. 
‘Hope not!’ What signify your hopes, who never
gave me any? But hear me out. I shall say some
things that will displease you; but more of another
nature. I went on guessing who could be the happy
man. That second Orme, Fowler, cannot be he, 

thought I. Is it the newly-arrived Beauchamp? He
is a pretty fellow enough [I had all your footsteps
watched, as I told you I would.] No, answered I myself,
she refused Lord D. and a whole tribe of us, before
Beauchamp came to England—Who the devil can
he be? —But when I heard that the dangerous man,
whom I had thought gone abroad to his matrimonial
destiny, was returned, unmarried; when I heard that
he was actually coming northward; I began to be
again afraid of him. 
Last Thursday night I had intelligence, that he was
seen at Dunstable in the morning, in his way towards
us. Then did my heart fail me. I had my spies about
Selby-house: I own it. What will not Love and
Jealousy make a man do? I understood, that your
uncle and Mr. Deane, and a tribe of servants for train-sake,
were set out to meet him. How I raved! How
I cursed! How I swore! —They will not surely,
thought I, allow my rival, at his first visit, to take up
his residence under the same roof with this charming
Witch! 
Witch! Mr. Greville— 
Witch! Yes, Witch! I called you ten thousand
names, in my rage, all as bad as that. Here, Jack,
Will, Tom, George, get ready instantly each a dozen
firebrands! I will light up Selby-house for a bonfire,
to welcome the arrival of the invader of my freehold! 
And prongs and pitchforks shall be got ready to push
every soul of the family back into the flames, that not
one of it may escape my vengeance— 
Horrid man! I will hear no more. 
You must! You shall! It is my dying speech, I
tell you.— 
A dying man should be penitent. 
To what purpose? —I can have no hope. What is
to be expected for or from a despairing man? —But
then I had intelligence brought me, that my rival was
not admitted to take up his abode with you. This 

saved Selby-house. All my malice then was against
the George at Northampton. The keeper of it owes,
said I to myself, a hundred thousand obligations to
me; yet to afford a retirement to my deadliest foe! — 
But 'tis more manly, thought I, in person, to call this
invader to account, if he pretends an interest at Selby-house; 
and to force him to relinquish his pretensions
to the Queen of it; as I had made more than one
gallant fellow do before, by dint of bluster. 
I slept not all that night. In the morning I made
my visit at the inn. I pretend to know, as well as any
man, what belongs to civility and good manners; but
I knew the character of the man I had to deal with:
I knew he was cool, yet resolute. My rage would
not let me be civil; and if it would, I knew I must
be rude to provoke him. I was rude. I was peremptory. 
Never were there such cold, such phlegmatic contempts,
passed upon man, as he passed upon me. I
came to a point with him. I heard he would not
fight: I was resolved he should. I followed him to
his chariot. I got him to a private place; but I had
the devil, and no man, to deal with. He cautioned
me, by way of insult, as I took it, to keep a guard. 
I took his hint. I had better not; for he knew all the
tricks of the weapon. He was in with me in a moment. 
I had no sword left me, and my life was at the
mercy of his. He gave me up my own sword— 
Cautioned me to regard my safety—Put up his; withdrew. 
—I found myself sensible of a damnable strain. 
I had no right-arm. I slunk away like a thief. He
mounted his triumphal car; and pursued his course to
the Lady of Selby-house. I went home, cursed, swore,
fell down, and bit the earth. 
My uncle looked impatient: Sir Charles seemed in
suspense, but attentive. Mr. Greville proceeded: 
I got Fenwick to go with me, to attend him at
night, by appointment. Cripple as I was, I would 

have provoked him: He would not be provoked:
And when I found that he had not exposed me at Selby-house; 
when I remembered that I owed my sword and
my life to his moderation; when I recollected his character; 
what he had done by Sir Hargrave Pollexfen; 
what Bagenhall had told me of him: Why the plague,
thought I, should I (hopeless as I am of succeeding
with my charming Byron, whether he lives or dies)
set my face against such a man? He is incapable either
of insult or arrogance: Let me (Fenwick advised
a scheme) let me make him my friend to save my pride,
and the devil take the rest, Harriet Byron, and all— 
Wicked man! —You was dying a thousand words
ago—I am sick of you!— 
You have not, madam, heard half my dying words
yet—But I would not terrify you—Are you terrified?— 
Indeed I am. 
Sir Charles motioned as if he would approach us; 
but kept his place, on my grandmamma's saying, Let
us hear his humour out: Mr. Greville was always
particular. 
Terrified, madam! What is your being terrified to
the sleepless nights, to the tormenting days, you have
given me? Cursing darkness, cursing light, and most
myself! —O madam! with shut teeth, What a torment
of torments have you been to me! —Well, but
now I will hasten to a conclusion, in mercy to you,
who, however, never shewed me any— 
I never was cruel, Mr. Greville— 
But you was; and most cruel, when most sweet-tempered. 
It was to that smiling obligingness that I
owed my ruin! That gave me hope; that radiance
of countenance; and that frozen heart! —O you are
a dear deceiver! —But I hasten to conclude my dying
speech—Give me your hand! —I will have it—I will
not eat it, as once I had like to have done. —‘And
now, madam, hear my parting words—You will 

have the glory of giving to the best of men, the best
of wives. Let it not be long before you do; for
the sake of many, who will hope on till then. As
your Lover, I must hate him: As your Husband, I
will love him. He will, he must, be kind, affectionate,
grateful, to you; and you will deserve all his
tenderness. May you live (the ornaments of human
nature as you are) to see your children's children; 
all promising to be as good, as worthy, as happy, as
yourselves! And, full of years, full of honour, in
one hour may you be translated to that Heaven
where only you can be more happy, than you will
be, if you are both as happy as I wish and expect you
to be!’ 
Tears dropt on my cheek, at this unexpected blessing; 
so like that of the wicked prophet of old, blessing
where he was expected to curse(a)  
He still held my hand—I will not, without your
leave, madam—May I, before I part with it? —He
looked at me as if for leave to kiss my hand, bowing
his head upon it. 
My heart was opened. God bless you, Mr. Greville!
as you have blessed me. —Be a good man, and
he will. —I withdrew not my hand. 
He kneeled on one knee; eagerly kissed my hand,
more than once. Tears were in his own eyes. He
arose, hurried me to Sir Charles, and holding to him
my then, through surprize, half-withdrawn hand— 
Let me have the pride, the glory, Sir Charles Grandison,
to quit this dear hand to yours. It is only to
yours that I would quit it—Happy, happy, happy pair! 
—None but the brave deserves the fair.— 
Sir Charles took my hand—Let this precious present
be mine, said he (kissing it), mine, with the declared
assent of every one here; and presented me to
my grandmamma and aunt. I was frighted by the
hurry the strange man had put me into— 

May I but live to see her yours, Sir! said my grandmamma,
in a kind of rapture! 
The moment he had put my hand into Sir Charles's,
he ran out of the room, with the utmost precipitation. 
He was gone, quite gone, when he came to be enquired
after; and every-body was uneasy for him, till
we were told, by one of the servants, that he took
from the window of the outward parlour his hat and
sword; and by another, that he met him, his servant
after him, hurrying away, and even sobbing as he
flew. —Was there ever so strange a man? 
Don't you pity Mr. Greville, my dear? 
Sir Charles was generously uneasy for him. 
Mr. Greville, said Lucy (who had always charity
for him) has frequently surprised us with his particularities; 
but I hope, from the last part of his behaviour,
that he is not the free-thinking man he sometimes
affects to be thought. I flatter myself, that Sir
Charles had a righter notion of him than we, in what
he said of him yesterday. 
Sir Charles waited on my grandmamma home; so
we had him not to supper. We are all to dine with
her to-morrow. Your brother, you may suppose, will
be a principal guest. 
Monday Morning, Oct. 16.
I have a Letter from my Emily; by which I find,
she is with you; tho' she has not dated it. You was
very kind in shewing the dear girl the overflowings of
my heart in her favour. She is all grateful love, and
goodness. I will soon write to her, to repeat my assurances,
that my whole power shall always be exerted
to do her pleasure. But you must tell her, as from
yourself, that she must have patience. I cannot ask
her guardian such a question as she puts, as to her
living with me, till I am likely to succeed. Would
the sweet girl have me make a request to him, that
shall shew him I am supposing myself to be his, before
I am so? We are not come so far on our journey by 

several stages. And yet, from what he intimated last
night, as he waited on my grandmamma to Shirley-manor,
I find, that his expectations are forwarder
than it will be possible for me to answer: And I must,
without intending the least affectation, for common
decorum-sake, take the management of this point upon
myself. For, my dear, we are every one of us
here so much in Love with him, that the moment he
should declare his wishes, they would be as ready to
urge me to oblige him, were he even to limit me but
to two or three days; as if they were afraid he would
not repeat his request. 
I have a Letter from Mr. Beauchamp. He writes,
that there are no hopes of Sir Harry's recovery. I am
very sorry for it. He does me great honour to write
to me to give him consolation. His is a charming
Letter—So full of filial piety! —Excellent young man! 
He breathes in it the true spirit of his friend. 
Sir Charles and his Beauchamp, and Dr. Bartlett,
correspond, I presume, as usual. What would I give
to see all Sir Charles writes that relates to us! 
Mr. Fenwick just now tells us, that Mr. Greville
is not well, and keeps his chamber. He has my cordial
wishes for his health. His last behaviour to me
appears, the more I think of it, more strange, from
such a man. I expected not that he would conclude
with such generous wishes. Nancy, who does not
love him, says, that it was such an overstrain of generosity
from him, that it might well over-set him. 
Did you think that our meek Nancy could have said
so severe a thing? But meekness offended (as she once
was by him) has an excellent memory, and can be
bitter. 
We are preparing now to go to Shirley-manor. 
Our cousins Patty and Kitty Holles will be there at
dinner. They have been for a few weeks past at their
aunt's, near Daventry. They are impatient to see 

Sir Charles. Adieu, my dearest Ladies! Continue to
love 
Your Harriet Byron. 

