


This completes a fatal Week since my setting
out, as I hoped, to see you, my dear Father and
Mother. O how different my Hopes then, from
what they are now! Yet who knows what these happy
Tiles may produce! 
But I must tell you, first, how I have been beaten
by Mrs. Jewkes! 'Tis very true! 
My Impatience was great to walk in the Garden,
to see if any thing had offer'd, answerable to my
Hopes. But this wicked Mrs. Jewkes would not let
me go without her; and she said she was not at
Leisure. We had a great many Words about it; 
for I said, it was very hard I could not be trusted to
walk by myself in the Garden for a little Air; but
must be dogg'd and watch'd worse than a Thief. 

She still pleaded her Instructions, and said she was
not to trust me out of her Sight: And you had better,
said she, be easy and contented, I assure you. For
I have worse Orders than you have yet found; and
if you remember, said she, what you said when
Mr. Williams was with us, asking if there were any
Gentry in the Neighbourhood, it makes me suspect
you want to get away to them, to tell your sad dismal
Story, as you call it. 
My Heart was at my Mouth; for I fear'd by that
Hint, she had seen my Letter under the Tiles:
O how uneasy I was! At last she said, Well, since
you take on so, you may take a Turn, and I will
be with you in a Minute. 
I went out; and when I was out of the Sight of
her Window, I speeded towards the hopeful Place; 
but was soon forced to slacken my. Pace, by her
odious Voice; Hey-day, why so nimble, and so fast?
said she: What! are you upon a Wager? I stopt for
her, till her pursy Sides were waddled up to me; 
and she held by my Arm, half out of Breath: So I
was forced to pass by the dear Place, without daring
to look at it. 
The Gardener was at work a little further, and so
we looked upon him; and I began to talk about his
Art; but she said softly, My Instructions are, not to let
you be so familiar with the Servants. Why, said I,
are you afraid I should confederate with them to
commit a Robbery upon my Master? May-be I am,
said the odious Wretch; for to rob him of yourself,
would be the worst that could happen to him,
in his Opinion. 
And pray, said I, walking on, how came I to be
his Property? What Right has he in me, but such as
a Thief may plead to stolen Goods? –––Why, was
ever the like heard, says she! –––This is downright
Rebellion, I protest! Well, well, Lambkin, (which 

the Foolish often calls me) if I was in his Place, he
should not have his Property in you long questionable. 
Why, what would you do, said I, if you was he? ––– 
Not stand shill-I, shall-I, as he does; but put you
and himself both out of your Pain. –––Why, Jezebel,
said I, (I could not help it); would you ruin
me by Force? –––Upon this she gave me a deadly
Slap upon my Shoulder: Take that, said she; who
do you call Jezebel? 
I was so scar'd, (for you never beat me, my dear
Father and Mother, in your Lives) that I was as
one thunder-struck; and looked round, as if I
wanted somebody to help me; but, alas! I had nobody; 
and said, at last, rubbing my Shoulder, Is
this too in your Instructions? –––Alas! for me! am
I to be beaten too? and so I fell a crying, and threw
myself upon the Grass-walk we were upon. –––Said
she, in a great Pet, I won't be call'd such Names,
I'll assure you. Marry come up! I see you have a
Spirit! You must and shall be kept under. I'll manage
such little provoking Things as you, I warrant
ye! Come, come, we'll go in Doors, and I'll lock
you up, and you shall have no Shoes, nor any thing
else, if this is to be the Case! 
I didn't know what to do. This was a cruel
thing to me, and I blam'd myself for my free
Speech; for now I had given her some Pretence; 
and Oh! thinks I, here I have, by my Malapertness,
ruin'd the only Project I had left. 
The Gardener saw this Scene; but she called to
him, Well, Jacob, what do you stare at! Pray mind,
what you're upon. And away he walk'd, to another
Quarter, out-of Sight. 
Well, thinks I, I must put on the Dissembler a
little, I see. She took my Hand roughly; Come,
get up, said she, and come in Doors. –––I'll Jezebel
you, I warrant ye! –––Why, dear Mrs. Jewkes, said 

I––– None of your Dears and your Coaxing, said
she; why not Jezebel again! —She was in a fearful
Passion, I saw, and I was half out of my Wits. 
Thinks I, I have often heard Women blam'd for
their Tongues; I wish mine had been shorter. But
I can't go in, said I, indeed I can't! –––Why, said
she, can't you? I'll warrant I can take such a thin
Body as you are under my Arm, and carry you in, if
you won't walk. You don't know my Strength— 
Yes, but I do, said I, too well; and will you not
use me worse when I come in? –––So I arose, and
she mutter'd to herself all the way, She to be a Jezebel
with me, that had used me so well! and suchlike. 
When I came near the House, I said, sitting down
upon a Settle-bench, Well, I will not go in, till you
say, you will forgive me, Mrs. Jewkes–––If you will
forgive my calling you that Name, I will forgive
your beating me—She sat down by me, and seem'd
in a great Pucker, and said, Well, come, I will forgive
you for this time; and so kissed me, as a Mark
of Reconciliation—But pray, said I, tell me where
I am to walk, and go, and give me what Liberty
you can; and when I know the most you can favour
me with, you shall see I will be as content as
I can; and not ask you for more. 
Why, said she, that's something like: I wish I
could give you all the Liberty you desire; for you
must think it is no Pleasure to me to tie you to my
Petticoat, as it were, and not to let you stir without
me—But People that will do their Duties, must
have some Trouble; and what I do, is to serve as
good a Master, to be sure, as lives—Ay, says I,
to every body but me! —He loves you too well, to
be sure, said she, and that's the Reason; so you
ought to bear it. I say, love, said I! Come, said she,
don't let the Wench see you have been crying, nor 

tell her any Tales; for you won't tell them fairly, I
am sure; and I'll send her, and you shall take another
Walk in the Garden, if you will. May-be,
said she, it will get you a Stomach to your Dinner; 
for you don't eat enough to keep Life and Soul together. 
You are Beauty to the Bone, said the strange
Wretch, or you could not look so well as you do, with
so little Stomach, so little Rest, and so much pining
and whining for nothing at all. Well, thought I, say
what thou wilt, so I can be rid of thy bad Tongue and
Company: And I hop'd to find some Opportunity now,
to come at my Sun-flower. But I walked the other
way, to take that in my Return, to avoid Suspicion. 
I forced my Discourse to the Wench; but it
was all upon general things; for I find she is asked
after every thing I say and do. When I came near
the Place, as I had been devising, I said, Pray, step
to the Gardener, and ask him to gather a Sallad
for me to Dinner. She called out, Jacob! —Said
I, he can't hear you so far off; and pray tell him, I
should like a Cucumber too, if he has one. When
she had stept about a Bow-shot from me, I popt
down, and whipt my Fingers under the upper Tile,
and pulled out a little Letter, without Direction,
and thrust it in my Bosom, trembling for Joy. She
was with me before I could well secure it; and I
was in such a taking, that I feared I should discover
myself. You seem frighted, Madam, said she: 
Why, said I, with a lucky Thought, (alas! your
poor Daughter will make an Intriguer by-and-by; 
but I hope an innocent one!) I stoopt to smell at
the Sun-flower, and a great nasty Worm run into
the Ground, that startled me; for I don't love
Worms. Said she, Sun-flowers don't smell. So I
find, said I. And so we walked in; and Mrs.
Jewkes said, Well, you have made haste in&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; You
shall go another time. 

I went up to my Closet, lock'd myself in, and
opening my Letter, found in it these Words: 

‘I am infinitely concern'd for your Distress. I
most heartily wish it may be in my Power to
serve and save so much Innocence, Beauty and
Merit. My whole Dependence is upon the 'Squire; 
and I have a near View of being provided for by
his Goodness to me. But yet, I would sooner
forfeit all my Hopes upon him, and trust in God for
the rest, than not assist you, if possible. I never
look'd upon Mr. B. in the Light he now appears
to me in, in your Case. To be sure, he is no profess'd
Deboshee. But I am intirely of Opinion, you
should, if possible, get out of his Hands, and
especially as you are in very bad ones in Mrs.
Jewkes's. 
‘We have here the Widow Lady Jones, Mistress
of a good Fortune, and a Woman of Virtue, I
believe. We have also old Sir Simon Darnford,
and his Lady, who is a good Woman; and they
have two Daughters. All the rest are but middling
People, and Traders, at best. I will try, if
you please, either Lady Jones, or Lady Darnford,
if they will permit you to take Refuge with them. 
I see no Probability of keeping myself conceal'd in
this Matter; but will, as I said, risque all things to
serve you; for I never saw a Sweetness and Innocence
like yours; and your hard Case has attached
me intirely to you; for I know, as you so happily
express, if I can serve you in this Case, I shall
thereby perform all the Acts of Religion in one. 
‘As to Lady Davers, I will convey a Letter, if
you please, to her; but it must not be from our
Post-house, I give you Caution; for the Man
owes all his Bread to the 'Squire, and his Place
too; and I believe, by something that dropt from 

him, over a Can of Ale, has his Instructions. You
don't know how you are surrounded; all which
confirms me in your Opinion, that no Honour is
meant you, let what will be professed; and I am
glad you want no Caution on that Head. 
‘Give me Leave to say, that I had heard much
in your Praise, both as to Person and Mind; but
I think greatly short of what you deserve: My
Eyes convince me of the one, your Letter of the
other. For sear of losing the present lucky Opportunity,
I am longer than otherwise I should be. 
But I will not inlarge, only to assure you, that I
am, to the best of my Power, 
‘Your faithful Friend and Servant,
Arthur Williams. 
‘I will come once every Morning, and once
every Evening, after School-time, to look
for your Letters. I'll come in, and return
without going into the House, if I: see the
Coast clear: Otherwise, to avoid Suspicion,
I'll come in.’ 

I instantly, to this pleasing Letter, wrote as follows: 

‘Reverend Sir,
O How answerable to your Function, and your
Character, is your kind Letter! God bless
you for it. I now think I am beginning to be
happy. I should be sorry you should suffer on my
Account; but I hope it will be made up to you
an hundred-fold, by that God whom you so faithfully
serve. I should be too happy, could I ever
have it in my Power to contribute in the least to
it. But, alas! to serve me, must be for God's 

sake only; for I am poor and lowly in Fortune; 
though in Mind, I hope, too high to do a mean
or unworthy Deed, to gain a Kingdom. But I lose
Time. 
‘Any way you think best, I shall be pleased with; 
for I know not the Persons, nor in what manner
it is best to apply to them. I am glad of the
Hint you so kindly give me of the Man at the
Post-house. I was thinking of opening a way for
myself by Letter, when I could have Opportunity; 
but I see more and more, that I am indeed
strangely surrounded with Dangers; and that there
is no Dependence to be made on my Master's
Honour. 
‘I should think, Sir, if either of those Ladies
would give Leave, I might some way get out by
Favour of your Key; and as it is impossible,
watched as I am, to know when it can be suppose,
Sir, you could get one made by it, and put
it, by the next Opportunity, under the Sun-flower? 
—I am sure no Time is to be lost; because it is
rather my Wonder, that she is not thoughtful about
this Key, than otherwise; for she forgets not the
minutest thing. But, Sir, if I had this Key, I
could, if these Ladies would not shelter me, run
away any-where. And if I was once out of the
House, they could have no Pretence to force me
in again; for I have done no Harm, and hope
to make my Story good to any compassionate
Body; and by this way you need not be known. 
Torture should not wring it from me, I assure
you. 
‘One thing more, good Sir. Have you no Correspondence
with my Master's Family? By that
means, may-be, I could be informed of his Intentions
of coming hither, and when. I inclose
you a Letter of a deceitful Wretch; for I can 

trust you with any thing, poor John Arnold. Its
Contents will tell why I inclose it. Perhaps, by
his means something may be discover'd; for he
seems willing to atone for his Treachery to me,
by the Intimation of future Service. I leave the
Hint for you to improve upon, and am, Reverend
Sir, 
‘Your for ever obliged
and thankful Servant 
‘I hope, Sir, by your Favour, I could send a little
Packet, now-and-then, some how, to my poor
Father and Mother. I have a little Stock of
Money, about five or six Guineas: Shall I
put half in your Hands, to defray a Man and
Horse, or any other Incidents?’ 

I had time but just to transcribe this, before I was
called to Dinner; and I put that for Mr. Williams,
with a Wafer in it, in my Bosom, to get an Opportunity
to lay it in the dear Place. 
O good Sirs! Of all the Flowers in the Garden,
the Sun-flower, sure, is the loveliest! –––It is a propitious
one to me! How nobly my Plot succeeds! 
But I begin to be afraid my Writings may be discover'd; 
for they grow large! I stitch them hitherto
in my Under-coat, next my Linen. But if this
Brute should search me! –––I must try to please her,
and then she won't. 
Well, I am but just come off from a Walk in
the Garden; and have deposited my Letter by a
simple Wile. I got some Horse-beans; and we
took a Turn in the Garden, to angle, as Mrs.
Jewkes had promis'd me. She baited the Hook, and
I held it, and soon hooked a lovely Carp. Play it, 

play it, said she; I did, and brought it to the Bank. 
A sad Thought just then came into my Head; and
I took it, and threw it in again; and O the Pleasure
it seem'd to have, to flounce in, when at Liberty! 
–––Why this? says she. O Mrs. Jewkes! said
I, I was thinking this poor Carp was the unhappy
Pamela. I was likening you and myself to my
naughty Master. As we hooked and deceived the
poor Carp, so was I betrayed by false Baits; and
when you said, Play it, play it, it went to my Heart, to
think I should sport with the Destruction of the poor
Fish I had betray'd; and I could not but fling it in
again: And did you not see the Joy with which the
happy Carp flounced from us! O! said I, may some
good mercisul Body procure me my Liberty in the
same manner; for, to be sure, I think my Danger
equal! 
Lord bless thee! said she, what a Thought is there! 
—Well, said I, I can angle no more. I'll try my
Fortune, said she, and took the Rod. Well, said I,
I will plant Life then, if I can, while you are destroying
it. I have some Horse-beans here, and I'll
go and stick them into one of the Borders, to see
how long they will be coming up; and I will call
them my Garden. 
So you see, dear Father and Mother (I hope now
you will soon see; for, may-be, if I can't get away
so soon myself, I may send my Papers, some how)
I say, you will see, that this furnishes me a good Excuse
to look after my Garden another time; and if
the Mould should look a little freshish, it won't be so
much suspected. She mistrusted nothing of this; 
and I went and stuck in here and there my Beans,
for about the Length of five Ells, of each side of
the Sun-flower; and easily reposited my Letter. 
And not a little proud am I of this Contrivance. 
Sure something will do at last. God grant it! 
