



My dear Father and Mother,
We had a great many neighbouring Gentlemen,
and their Ladies, this Day at Dinner; and my
Master made a fine Entertainment for them. And
Isaac, and Mr. Jonathan, and Benjamin waited at
Table. And Isaac tells Mrs. Jervis, that the Ladies
will by-and-by come to see the House, and have the
Curiosity to see me; for it seems, they said to my
Master, when the Jokes flew about, Well Mr. B&wblank;,
we understand that you have a Servant-maid, who is
the greatest Beauty in the County; and we promise
ourselves to see her before we go. 
The Wench is well enough, said he; but no such
Beauty as you talk of, I'll assure ye. She was my
Mother's Waiting-maid, and she on her Death-bed
engag'd me to be kind to her. She is young, and
every thing is pretty that is young. 
Aye, aye, says one of the Ladies, that is true; but
if your Mother had not recommended her so strongly,
there is so much Merit in Beauty, that I make no
doubt such a fine Gentleman would have wanted no
such strong Inducement to be kind. 
They all laugh'd at my Master: And he, it seems,
laugh'd for Company; but said, I don't know how it
is; but I see with different Eyes from other People; 
for I have heard much more Talk of her Prettiness,
than I think she deserves: She is well enough, as I
said; but I think her greatest Excellence is, that she
is humble, and courteous, and faithful, and makes
all her Fellow-servants love her; my House-keeper
in particular doats upon her, and you know, Ladies,
she is a Woman of Discernment; and, as for Mr.
Longman, and Jonathan, here, if they thought 

themselves young enough, I am told, they would fight
for her. Is it not true, Jonathan? Troth, Sir, said
he, an't please your Honour, I never knew her Peer,
and all your Honour's Family are of the same Mind. 
Do ye hear now? said my Master—Well, said the
Ladies, we will make a Visit to Mrs. Jervis by-and-by,
and hope to see this Paragon. 
Well, I believe, they are coming, and I will tell
you more by-and-by. I wish they had come, and
were gone. Why can't they make their Game without
me! 
Well, these fine Ladies have been here, and gone
back again. I would have been absent if I could, and
did step into the Closet, so they saw me not when
they came in. 
There were four of them, Lady Arthur at the
great white House on the Hill, Lady Brooks, Lady
Towers, and the other, it seems, a Countess, of
some hard Name, I forget what. 
So, Mrs. Jervis, says one of the Ladies, how do you do? We are all come to inquire after your
Health. I am much oblig'd to your Ladyships, said
Mrs. Jervis: Will your Ladyships please to sit
down? But, said the Countess, we are not only
come to ask after Mrs. Jervis's Health neither; but
we are come to see a Rarity besides. Aye, says
Lady Arthur, I have not seen your Pamela these two
Years, and they tell me she is grown wondrous
pretty in that Time. 
Then I wish'd I had not been in the Closet; for
when I came out, they must needs know I heard
them: but I have often found, that bashful Bodies owe
themselves a Spight, and frequently consound themselves
more, by endeavouring to avoid Confusion. 
Why, yes, says Mrs. Jervis, Pamela is very pretty
indeed; she's but in the Closet there:—Pamela, pray 

step hither. I came out, all cover'd with Blushes; 
and they smil'd at one another. 
The Countess took me by the Hand: Why, indeed,
she was pleas'd to say, Report has not been too
lavish, I'll assure you. Don't be asham'd, Child (and
star'd full in my Face); I wish I had just such a Face
to be asham'd of! O how like a Fool I look'd!— 
Lady Arthur said, Aye, my good Pamela, I say as
her Ladyship says: Don't be so confus'd; tho' indeed
it becomes you too. I think your good Lady
departed made a sweet Choice of such a pretty Attendant. 
She would have been mighty proud of you,
as she always was praising you, had she liv'd till now. 
Ah! Madam, said Lady Brooks, do you think, that
so dutiful a Son as our Neighbour, who always admir'd
what his Mother lov'd, does not pride himself, for all
what he said at Table, in such a pretty Maiden? 
She look'd with such a malicious sneering Countenance,
I cannot abide her. 
Lady Towers said, with a free Air; for it seems
she is call'd a Wit; Well, Mrs. Pamela, I can't say,
I like you so well as these Ladies do; for I should
never care, if you were my Servant, to see you and
your Master in the same House together. Then they
all set up a great Laugh. 
I know what I could have said, if I durst. But
they are Ladies—and Ladies may say any thing. 
Says Lady Towers, Can the pretty Image speak,
Mrs. Jervis? I vow she has speaking Eyes! O you
little Rogue, says she, and tapt me on the Cheek,
you seem born to undo, or to be undone! 
God forbid, and please your Ladyship, said I, it
should be either! —I beg, said I, to withdraw; for
the Sense I have of my Unworthiness, renders me
unfit for such a Presence. 
I then went away, with one of my best Curchees; 
and Lady Towers said, as I went out, Prettily said, 

I vow! —And Lady Brooks said, See that Shape! 
I never saw such a Face and Shape in my Life; 
why she must be better descended than you have
told me! 
And so, belike, their Clacks run for half an Hour
in my Praises, and glad was I, when I got out of the
Hearing of them. 
But it seems they went down with such a Story to
my Master, and so full of me, that he had a hard
Life to stand it; but as it was very little to my Reputation,
I am sure I could take no Pride in it; and
I fear'd it would make no better for me. This gives
me another Cause for leaving this House. 
This is Thursday Morning, and next Thursday I
hope to set out; for I have finish'd my Task, and
my Master is horrid cross: And I am vex'd, his
Crossness affects me so. If ever he had any Kindness
towards me, I believe he now hates me heartily. 
Is it not strange, that Love borders so much upon
Hate? But this wicked Love is not like the true
virtuous Love, to be sure: That and Hatred must
be as far off, as Light and Darkness. And how must
this Hate have been increased, if he had met with a
base Compliance, after his wicked Will had been
gratify'd? 
Well, one may see by a little, what a great deal
means: For if Innocence cannot attract common
Civility, what must Guilt expect, when Novelty had
ceas'd to have its Charms, and Changeableness had
taken place of it? Thus we read in Holy Writ, that
wicked Amnon, when he had ruin'd poor Tamar,
hated her more than ever he lov'd her, and would
have turn'd her out of Door! 
How happy am I, to be turn'd out of Door, with
that sweet Companion my Innocence! —O may
that be always my Companion! And while I presume 

not upon my own Strength, and am willing
to avoid the Tempter, I hope the Divine Grace
will assist me. 
Forgive me, that I repeat in my Letter Part of my
hourly Prayer. I owe every thing, next to God's
Goodness, to your Piety and good Examples, my
dear Parents; my dear poor Parents, I will say, because
your Poverty is my Pride, as your Integrity
shall be my Imitation. 
As soon as I have din'd, I will put on my new
Cloaths. I long to have them on. I know I shall
surprise Mrs. Jervis with them; for she shan't see
me till I am full-dress'd. —John is come back, and
I'll soon send you some of what I have written. — 
I find he is going early in the Morning; and so I'll
close here, that I am 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 
Don't lose your Time in meeting me; because
I am so uncertain. It is hard, if some how or
other, I can't get a Passage to you. But maybe
my Master won't refuse to let John bring
me. I can ride behind him, I believe, well
enough; for he is very careful, and very honest; 
and you know John as well as I; for he loves
you both. Besides, may-be, Mrs. Jervis can
put me in some way. 

