



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, Aug. 11. 
I will send you a large packet, as you desire and
expect; since I can do it by so safe a conveyance: 
But not all that is come to my hand—For I must
own that my friends are very severe; too severe for
any-body who loves them not, to see their Letters. 
You, my dear, would not call them my Friends, 

you said, long ago; but my Relations: Indeed I cannot
call them my Relations, I think! —But I am ill; 
and therefore perhaps more peevish than I should be. 
It is difficult to go out of ourselves to give a judgment
against ourselves; and yet, oftentimes, to pass a just
judgment, we ought. 
I thought I should alarm you in the choice of my
Executor. But the sad necessity I am reduced to
must excuse me. 
I shall not repeat any-thing I have said before on
that subject: But if your objections will not be answered
to your satisfaction by the Papers and Letters
I shall inclose, marked 1, 2, 3, 4, to 9, I must
think myself in another instance unhappy; since I am
engaged too far (and with my own judgment too) to
recede. 
As Mr. Belford has transcribed for me, in confidence,
from his friend's Letters, the passages which accompany
this, I must insist, that you suffer no soul but
yourself to peruse them; and that you return them by
the very first opportunity; that so no use may be made
of them that may do hurt either to the original writer,
or to the communicator. You'll observe I am bound
by promise to this care. If thro' my means any mischief
should arise, between this humane and that inhuman
Libertine, I should think myself utterly inexcuseable. 
I subjoin a list of the Papers or Letters I shall inclose. You must return them all when perused (a) . 

I am very much tired and fatigued—with—I don't
know what—with writing, I think—But most with
myself, and with a situation I cannot help aspiring to
get out of, and above! 
O, my dear, the world we live in is a sad, a very
sad world! —While under our parents protecting
wings, we know nothing at all of it. Book-learned
and a scribbler, and looking at people as I saw them
as visitors or visiting, I thought I knew a great deal
of it. Pitiable ignorance! —Alas! I knew nothing
at all! 
With zealous wishes for your happiness, and the
happiness of every one dear to you, I am, and will
ever be, 
Your gratefully-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 