


Somebody rapp'd at our Chamber-door
this Morning soon after it
was light: Mrs. Jewkes ask'd who
it was; my Master said, Open the
Door, Mrs. Jewkes! —O, said I, for
God's sake, Mrs. Jewkes, don't. Indeed,
said she, but I must; I clung about her. 
Then, said I, let me slip on my Cloaths first. But
he rapp'd again, and she broke from me; and I 
was frighted out of my Wits, and folded myself in
the Bed-cloaths. He enter'd, and said, What, Pamela,
so fearful, after what pass'd yesterday between
us! O Sir, Sir, said I, I fear my Prayers have
wanted their wish'd Effect. Pray, good Sir, consider
—He sat down on the Bed-side, and interrupted
me, No need of your foolish Fears; I
shall say but a Word or two, and go away. 
After you went to Bed, said he, I had an Invitation
to a Ball, which is to be this Night at Stamford,
on Occasion of a Wedding; and I am going
to call on Sir Simon and his Lady, and Daughters; 
for it is a Relation of theirs: So I shall not be at
home till Saturday. I come therefore to caution
you, Mrs. Jewkes, before Pamela, (that she may
not wonder at being closer confin'd, than for these
three or four Days past) that no body sees her,
nor delivers any Letter to her in this Space; for
a Person has been seen lurking about, and inquiring
after her; and I have been well inform'd,
that either Mrs. Jervis, or Mr. Longman, has
wrote a Letter, with a Design of having it convey'd
to her: And, said he, you must know, Pamela,
that I have order'd Mr. Longman to give
up his Accounts, and have dismiss'd Jonathan,
and Mrs. Jervis, since I have been here; for their
Behaviour has been intolerable: and they have
made such a Breach between my Sister Davers
and me that we shall never, perhaps, make up. 
Now, Pamela, I shall take it kindly in you, if
you will confine yourself to your Chamber pretty
much for the Time I am absent, and not give Mrs.
Jewkes Cause of Trouble or Uneasiness; and the rather,
as you know she acts by my Orders. 
Alas! Sir, said I, I fear all these good Bodies
have suffer'd for my sake! —Why, said he, I believe
so too; and there never was a Girl of your 
Innocence, that set a large Family in such Uproar,
surely. —But let that pass. You know both of you
my Mind, and in part, the Reason of it. I shall
only say, that I have had such a Letter from my
Sister, that I could not have expected; and, Pamela,
said he, neither you nor I have Reason
to thank her, as you shall know, perhaps, at my
Return. —I go in my Coach, Mrs. Jewkes, because
I take Lady Darnford, and Mr. Peters's
Niece, and one of Lady Darnford's Daughters; 
and Sir Simon and his other Daughter go in his
Chariot; so let all the Gates be fasten'd, and don't
take any Airing in either of the two Chariots, nor
let any body go to the Gate, without you, Mrs.
Jewkes. I'll be sure, said she, to obey your Honour. 
I will give Mrs. Jewkes no Trouble, Sir, said I,
and will keep pretty much in my Chamber, and not
stir so much as into the Garden, without her; to
shew you I will obey in every thing I can. But I
begin to fear –– Ay, said he, more Plots and Contrivances,
don't you? —But I'll assure you, you
never had less Reason; and I tell you the Truth; 
for I am really going to Stamford, this Time; and
upon the Occasion I tell you. And so, Pamela,
give me your Hand, and one Kiss, and I am gone. 
I durst not refuse, and said, God bless you, Sir,
where-ever you go! —But I am sorry for what
you tell me about your Servants! 
He and Mrs. Jewkes had a little Talk without the
Door; and I heard her say, You may depend, Sir,
upon my Care and Vigilance. 
He went in his Coach, as he said he should, and
very richly dress'd; which looks like what he said: 
But, really, I have had so many Tricks, and Plots,
and Surprizes, that I know not what to think. But 
I mourn for poor Mrs. Jervis. —So here is Parson
Williams; here is poor naughty John; here is good
Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Jonathan, turn'd away for
me! —Mr. Longman is rich indeed, and so need the
less matter it; but I know it will grieve him: And
for poor Mr. Jonathan, I am sure it will cut that
good old Servant to the Heart. Alas for me! What
Mischiefs am I the Occasion of? —Or, rather, my
Master, whose Actions by me, have made so many
of my good kind Friends forfeit his Favour, for my
sake! 
I am very sad about these things: If he really
loved me, methinks he should not be so angry that
his Servants loved me too. —I know not what to
think! 