



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, July 26. 
I came not to town till this morning early; poor Belton
clinging to me, as a man destitute of all other hold. 
I hastened to Smith's; and had but a very indifferent
account of the lady's health. I sent up my compliments; 
and she desired to see me in the afternoon. 
Mrs. Lovick told me, that, after I went away on Saturday,
she actually parted with one of her best suits of cloaths,
to a gentlewoman who is her (Mrs. Lovick's) benefactress,
and who bought them for a niece who is very speedily to be
married, and whom she fits out and portions as her intended
heiress. The lady was so jealous that the money
might come from you or me, that she would see the purchaser: 
Who owned to Mrs. Lovick, that she bought them
for half their worth: But yet, tho' her conscience permitted
her to take them at such an under-rate, the widow
says, her friend admired the lady, as one of the loveliest
of her sex: And having been let into a little of her story,
could not help tears at taking away her purchase. 
She may be a good sort of woman: Mrs. Lovick says,
she is: But Self is an odious devil, that reconciles to
some people the most cruel and dishonest actions. But,
nevertheless, it is my opinion, that those who can suffer
themselves to take advantage of the necessities of their 

fellow-creatures, in order to buy any thing at a less rate
than would allow them the legal interest of their purchase-money
(supposing they purchase before they want), are no
better than robbers for the difference.— To plunder a
wreck, and to rob at a fire, are indeed higher degrees of
wickedness: But do not these as well as the others heighten
the distresses of the distressed, and heap more misery on the
miserable, whom it is the duty of every one to relieve? 
About three o'clock I went again to Smith's. The lady
was writing when I sent up my name; but admitted of
my visit. I saw a visible alteration in her countenance for
the worse; and Mrs. Lovick respectfully accusing her of
too great assiduity to her pen, early and late, and of her
abstinence the day before, I took notice of the alteration; 
and told her, that her physician had greater hopes of her,
than she had of herself; and I would take the liberty to
say, that despair of recovery allowed not room for cure. 
She said, She neither despaired nor hoped. Then stepping
to the glass, with great composure, My countenance,
says she, is indeed an honest picture of my heart. But the
mind will run away with the body at any time. 
Writing is all my diversion, continued she; and I have
subjects that cannot be dispensed with. As to my hours,
I have always been an early riser: But now Rest is less
in my power than ever: Sleep has a long time ago
quarrelled with me, and will not be friends, altho' I have
made the first advances. What will be, must. 
She then stept to her closet, and brought to me a parcel
sealed up with three seals: Be so kind, said she, as to give
This to your friend. A very grateful present it ought to be
to him: For, Sir, this packet contains all his letters to me. 
Such letters they are, as, compared with his actions, would
reflect dishonour upon all his Sex, were they to fall into
other hands. 
As to my letters to him, they are not many. He may
either keep or destroy them, as he pleases. 
I thought I ought not to forego this opportunity to
plead for you: I therefore, with the packet in my hand,
urged all the arguments I could think of in your favour. 
She heard me out with more attention than I could have
promised myself, considering her determin'd resolution. 

I would not interrupt you, Mr. Belford, said she, tho' I am
far from being pleased with the subject of your discourse. 
The motives for your pleas in his favour, are generous. I
love to see instances of generous friendship in either Sex. 
But I have written my full mind on this subject to Miss
Howe, who will communicate it to the ladies of his family. 
No more, therefore, I pray you, upon a topic
that may lead to disagreeable recriminations. 
Her apothecary came in. He advised her to the air,
and blamed her for so great an application, as he was told
she made, to her pen; and he gave it as the Doctor's opinion,
as well as his own, that she would recover, if she
herself desired to recover, and would use the means. 
The lady may indeed write too much for her health,
perhaps: But I have observed on several occasions, that
when the physical men are at a loss what to prescribe, they
forbid their patients what they best like, and are most diverted
with. 
But, noble-minded as they see this lady is, they know
not half her nobleness of mind, nor how deeply she is
wounded; and depend too much upon her youth, which
I doubt will not do in this case, and upon time, which
will not alleviate the woes of such a mind: For, having
been bent upon doing good, and upon reclaiming a libertine
whom she loved, she is disappointed in all her darling views,
and will never be able, I fear, to look up with satisfaction
enough in herself to make life desirable to her. For this
lady had other views in living, than the common ones of
eating, sleeping, dressing, visiting, and those other fashionable
amusements, which fill up the time of most of
her Sex, especially of those of it, who think themselves
fitted to shine in and adorn polite assemblies. Her grief,
in short, seems to me to be of such a nature, that time,
which alleviates most other persons afflictions, will, as the
poet says, give increase to hers. 
Thou, Lovelace, mightest have seen all this superior excellence,
as thou wentest along. In every word, in every
sentiment, in every action, is it visible. —But thy cursed
inventions and intriguing spirit ran away with thee. 'Tis fit
that the subject of thy wicked boast, and of talents so egregiously
misapplied, should be thy punishment and thy curse. 

Mr. Goddard took his leave; and I was going to do so
too, when the maid came up, and told her, a gentleman
was below, who very earnestly inquired after her health,
and desired to see her: His name Hickman. 
She was overjoyed; and bid the maid desire the gentleman
to walk up. 
I would have withdrawn; but, I suppose, she thought
it was likely I should have met him upon the stairs, and so
she forbid it. 
She shot to the stairs-head to receive him, and, taking
his hand, asked half a dozen questions (without waiting
for any answer) in relation to Miss Howe's health; acknowleging,
in high terms, her goodness in sending him
to see her, before she set out upon her little journey. 
He gave her a letter from that young lady; which she
put into her bosom, saying, She would read it by-and-by. 
He was visibly shocked to see how ill she looked. 
You look at me with concern, Mr. Hickman, said she—Oh! 
Sir, times are strangely alter'd with me, since I saw you last
at my dear Miss Howe's! —What a chearful creature was
I then! —My heart at rest! My prospects charming! And
beloved by every-body! —But I will not pain you! 
Indeed, Madam, said he, I am grieved for you at my soul. 
He turned away his face with visible grief in it. 
Her own eyes glisten'd: But she turned to each of us,
presenting one to the other: Him to me, as a gentleman
truly deserving to be called so; Me to him, as your friend,
indeed [How was I, at that instant, ashamed of myself!]; 
but, nevertheless, as a man of humanity; detesting my
friend's baseness; and desirous of doing her all manner
of good offices. 
Mr. Hickman received my civilities with a coldness,
which, however, was rather to be expected on your account,
than that it deserved exception on mine. And the
lady invited us both to breakfast with her in the morning; 
he being obliged to return next day. 
I left them together, and called upon Mr. Dorrell, my
attorney, to consult him upon poor Belton's affairs; and
then went home, and wrote thus far, preparative to what
may occur in my breakfasting-visit in the morning. 