



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Morning, Six o'Clock. 
Mrs. Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked
of but of my going to my uncle Antony's. 
She has been order'd, she says, to get ready to attend
me thither. And, upon my expressing my averseness
to go, had the confidence to say, That having
heard me often praise the romantic-ness of the place,
she was astonish'd (her hands and eyes lifted up) that
I should set myself against going to a house so much
in my taste. 
I asked, if this was her own insolence, or her
young mistress's observation? 
She half-astonish'd me by her answer; That it was
hard she could not say a good thing, without being
robbed of the merit of it. 
As the wench looked as if she really thought she
had said a good thing, without knowing the boldness
of it, I let it pass. But, to say the truth, this creature
has surprised me on many occasions with her
smartness: For, since she has been imploy'd in this
controuling office, I have discover'd a great deal of
wit in her assurance, which I never suspected before. 
This shews, that insolence is her talent; and that Fortune,
in placing her as a servant to my sister, has not
done so kindly by her as Nature; for that she would
make a better figure as her companion. And, indeed,
I can't help thinking sometimes, that I myself was
better fitted by Nature to be the servant of both, than
the mistress of the one, or the sister of the other. 
And within these few months past, Fortune has acted
by me, as if she were of the same mind. 

Friday, Ten o' Clock. 
Going down to my Poultry-yard, just now, I heard
my brother and sister, and that Solmes laughing and
triumphing together. The high Yew Hedge between
us, which divides the yard from the garden, hinder'd
them from seeing me. 
My brother, as I found, had been reading part, or
the whole perhaps, of the copy of his last letter— 
Mighty prudent and consistent, you'll say, with their
views, to make me the wife of a man, from whom
they conceal not, what, were I to be such, it would
be kind in them to endeavour to conceal, out of regard
to my future peace: But I have no doubt, that
they hate me heartily. 
Indeed you was up with her there, brother, said
my sister! You need not have bid her not write to
you. I'll engage, with all her wit, she'll never pretend
to answer it. 
Why, indeed, said my brother, with an air of
College-sufficiency, with which he abounds, (for he
thinks nobody writes like himself) I believe I have
given her a choak-pear . What say you, Mr. Solmes? 
Why, Sir, said he, I think it is unanswerable. 
But will it not exasperate her more against me? 
Never fear, Mr. Solmes, said my brother, but
we'll carry our point, if she do not tire you out first. 
We have gone too far in this method to recede. Her
cousin Modern will soon be here; so all must be
over, before that time, or she'll be made independent
of us all. 
There, Miss Howe, is the reason given for their
Jehu-driving! 
Mr. Solmes declar'd, that he was determin'd to
persevere while my brother gave him any hopes, and
while my father stood firm. 
My sister told my brother, that he hit me charmingly
on the reason why I ought to converse with 

Mr. Solmes. But that he should not be so smart upon
the sex, for the faults of this perverse girl. 
Some lively, and I suppose, witty answer, my brother
return'd; for he and Mr. Solmes laugh'd outrageously
upon it, and Bella laughing too, call'd him
a naughty gentleman: But I heard no more of what
they said; they walking on into the garden. 
If you think, my dear, that what I have related,
did not again fire me, you will find yourself mistaken,
when you read at this place the inclosed copy
of my letter to my brother; struck off, while the iron
was red-hot. 
No more call me meek and gentle, I beseech you. 

To Mr. James Harlowe. 
Friday Morning. 
Sir, 
If, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be
silent on occasion of your last, you would perhaps
conclude, that I was consenting to go to my uncle
Antony's, upon the condition you mention. My father
must do as he pleases with his child. He may
turn me out of his doors, if he thinks fit, or give
you leave to do it; but, (loth as I am to say it) I
should think it very hard to be carry'd by force to
any-body's house, when I have one of my own to
go to. 
Far be it from me, notwithstanding your's and my
sister's provocations, to think of taking my estate into
my own hands, without my papa's leave: But why,
if I must not stay any longer here, may I not be permitted
to go thither? I will engage to see nobody
they would not have me see, if this favour be permitted. 
Favour I call it, and am ready to receive and
acknowlege it as such, altho' my grandfather's will
has made it matter of right. 
You ask me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the
postscript to your letter, if I have not some new proposals 

to make. I have (since you put the question)
three or four: —New ones all, I think; tho' I will
be so bold as to say, that, submitting the case to any
one impartial person, whom you have not set against
me, my old ones ought not to have been rejected. I
think This, why then should I not write it? —Nor
have you any more reason to storm at your sister, for
telling it you (since you seem, in your letter, to
make it your boast how you turned my mamma and
my aunt Hervey against me) than I have to be angry
with my brother, for treating me as no brother ought
to treat a sister. 
These are my new proposals then: 
That, as above, I may not be hinder'd from going
to reside (under such conditions as shall be prescribed
to me, which I will most religiously observe) at my
grandfather's late house. I will not again in this place
call it mine. I have reason to think it a great misfortune,
that ever it was so! Indeed I have! 
If this be not permitted, I desire leave to go for a
month, or for what time shall be thought fit, to Miss
Howe's. I dare say her mamma will consent to it, if
I have my papa's permission to go. 
If this, neither, be allowed, and I am to be turned
out of my father's house, I beg I may be suffer'd to
go to my aunt Hervey's, where I will inviolably observe
her commands, and those of my papa and
mama. 
But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my
humble request, that I may be sent to my uncle Harlowe's,
instead of my uncle Antony's. I mean not
by this any disrespect to my uncle Antony: But his
Meat, with his Bridge threaten'd to be drawn up, and
perhaps his Chapel, terrify me beyond expression, notwithstanding
your witty ridicule upon me for that apprehension. 
If this likewise be refused, and I must be carried to
the Moated house, which used to be a delightful one 

to me, let it be promised me, that I shall not be compelled
to receive Mr. Solmes's visits there; and then
I will as chearfully go, as ever I did. 
So here, Sir, are my new proposals. And if none
of them answer your end, as each of them tends to
the exclusion of that ungenerous persister's visits, be
pleased to know, that there is no misfortune I will
not submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to
the man, to whom I can allow no share in my heart. 
If I write in a style different from my usual, and
different from what I wished to have occasion to write,
an impartial person, who knew what I have accidentally,
within this hour past, heard from your
mouth, and my sister's, and a third person's (particularly
the reason you give for driving on at this violent
rate; to-wit, my cousin Morden's soon-expected arrival),
would think, I have but too much reason for
it. 
Then be pleased to remember, Sir, that when my
whining vocatives have subjected me to so much scorn
and ridicule, it is time, were it but to imitate examples
so excellent as you and my sister set me, that I
should endeavour to assert my character, in order to
be thought less an alien, and nearer of kin to you both, than either of you have of late seemed to suppose me. 
Give me leave, in order to empty my female quiver
at once, to add, that I know no other reason you can
have, for forbidding me to reply to you, after you have
written what you pleased to me, than that you are
conscious you cannot answer to reason and to justice
the treatment you give me. 
If it be otherwise, I, an un-learned, un-logical girl,
younger by near a third than yourself, will venture
(so assured am I of the justice of my cause) to put my
fate upon an issue with you: With you, Sir, who
have had the advantage of an academical education; 
whose mind must have been strengthen'd by observation,
and learned conversation; and who, pardon 

my going so low, have been accustomed to give
choak-pears to those you vouchsafe to write against. 
Any impartial person, your late Tutor, for instance; 
or the pious and worthy Dr. Lewin, may be judge between us: 
And if either give it against me, I will promise
to resign to my destiny: Provided, if it be given
against you, that my father will be pleased only to
allow of my negative to the person so violently sought
to be imposed upon me. 
I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier
come into this proposal, as you seem to have a high
opinion of your talents for argumentation; and not a
low one of the cogency of the arguments contained in
your last letter. And as I can possibly have no advantage
in a contention with you, if the justice of
my cause affords me not any, (as you have no opinion
it will) it behoves you, methinks, to shew to an impartial
moderator, that I am wrong, and you not so. 
If this be accepted, there is a necessity for its being
carry'd on by the pen; the facts to be stated, and
agreed upon by both; and the decision to be given,
according to the force of the arguments each shall
produce in support of their side of the question: For,
give me leave to say, I know too well the manliness of
your temper, to offer at a personal debate with you. 
If it be not accepted, I shall conclude, that you
cannot defend your conduct towards me: And shall
only beg of you, that, for the future, you will treat
me with the respect due to a sister from a brother,
who would be thought as polite as learned. 
And now, Sir, if I have seem'd to shew some spirit,
not quite foreign to the relation I have the honour to
bear to you, and to my sister; and which may be deem'd
not altogether of a piece with that part of my character
which once, it seems, gained me every one's
love; be pleased to consider to whom, and to what
it is owing; and that this part of that character was
not dispensed with, till it subjected me to that scorn 

and those insults, which a brother, who has been so
tenacious of an independence, that I voluntarily gave
up, and who has appeared so exalted upon it, ought
not to have shewn to any-body, much less to a weak
and defenceless sister: Who is, notwithstanding, an
affectionate and respectful one, and would be glad to
shew herself to be so upon all future occasions; as
she has in every action of her past life, altho' of late
she has met with such unkind returns. 
Cl. Harlowe. 

See the force and volubility, as I may say, of passion; 
for the letter I send you is my first draught,
struck off without a blot or erazure. 
Friday, Three o'Clock. 
AS soon as I had transcribed it, I sent it down to
my brother by Mrs. Betty. 
The wench came up soon after, all aghast, with
her Lord, Miss! What have you done? —What
have you written? For you have set them all in a
joyful uproar! 
* *
My Sister is but this moment gone from me: She
came up, all in a flame, which obliged me abruptly to
lay down my pen: She run to me— 
O Spirit! said she; tapping my neck a little too
hard. And is it come to this at last!— 
Do you beat me, Bella? 
Do you call this beating you? Only tapping your
shoulder thus, said she; tapping again more gently— 
This is what we expected it would come to—You
want to be independent—My papa has lived too long
for you!— 
I was going to speak with vehemence; but she put
her handkerchief before my mouth, very rudely— 
You have done enough with your pen, mean listener,
as you are! But, know, that neither your independent 

scheme, nor any of your visiting ones, will
be granted you. Take your course, perverse one; 
call in your Rake to help you to an in-dependence upon
your parents, and a dependence upon him! —Do
To! —Prepare this moment—Resolve what you will
take with you! —To-morrow you go! —Depend upon it,
to-morrow you go! —No longer shall you
tarry here, watching, and creeping about to hearken
to what people say! —'Tis determin'd, child! —You
go to-morrow! —My brother would have come up
to tell you so! —But I persuaded him to the contrary— 
For I know not, what had become of you, if he
had—Such a letter! —Such an insolent, such a
conceited challenger! —O thou vain creature! —But prepare
your self, I say—To-morrow you go—My
brother will accept your bold challenge; but it must
be personal; and at my uncle Anthony's—Or perhaps
at Mr. Solmes's— 
Thus she ran on, almost foaming with passion, till,
quite out of patience, I said, No more of your violence,
Bella—Had I known in what a way you
would come up, you should not have found my chamber-door
open! —Talk to your servant in this manner: Unlike you, as I bless God I am, nevertheless your sister—And let me tell you, that I won't
go to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to that— 
except I am dragg'd away by violence. 
What! not if your papa, or your mamma commands
it—Girl? said she; intending another word,
by her pause, and manner, before it came out. 
Let it come to that Bella—Then I shall know
what to say—But it shall be from either of their own
mouths, if I do. —Not from yours, nor your Betty's— 
And say another word to me, in this manner, and
be the consequence what it may, I will force myself
into their presence; and demand what I have done
to be used thus! 
Come along, child! —Come along, meekness— 

taking my hand, and leading me towards the door— 
Demand it of them now—You'll find both your despised
parents together! —What! does your heart
fail you?—[for I resisted being thus insolently led, and
pulled my hand from her.] 
I want not to be led, said I; and since I can plead
your invitation, I will go: And was posting to the
stairs, accordingly, in my passion—But she got between
me and the door, and shut it— 
Let me first, bold one, apprise them of your visit: 
—For your own sake, let me—For my brother is
with them. But yet opening it again, seeing me
shrink back—Go if you will! —Why don't you
go! —Why don't you go, Miss—following me to
my closet, whither I retired, with my heart full, and
pulled the sash-door after me; and could no longer
hold in my tears. 
Nor would I answer one word to her repeated aggravations,
and demands upon me to open my door
(for the key was on the inside) nor so much as turn
my head towards her, as she looked thro' the glass
at me. And at last, which vex'd her to the heart,
I drew the silk curtain, that she should not see me,
and down she went muttering all the way. 
Is not this usage enough to provoke one to a rashness
one had never thought of committing? 
As it is but too probable, that I may be hurry'd
away to my uncle's, without being able to give you
previous notice of it; I beg, that as soon as you shall
hear of such a violence, you will send to the usual
place, to take back such of your letters, as may not
have reached my hands, or to fetch any of mine,
that may be there. May you, my dear, be always
happy, prays your 
Cl. Harlowe. 
I have received your four letters. But am in such
a ferment, that I cannot at present write to them. 
