



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. March 1. 
I now take up my pen, to lay before you the
inducements and motives which my friends have
to espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. Solmes. 
In order to set this matter in a clear light, it is
necessary to go a little backward, and even perhaps
to mention some things which you already know: 
And so you may look upon what I am going to relate, 

as a kind of supplement to my letters of the 15th and
20th of January last. 
In those letters, of which I have kept memorandums,
I gave you an account of my brother's and sister's
implacableness to Mr. Lovelace; and the methods
they took (so far as they had then come to my knowlege)
to ruin him in the opinion of my other friends: 
And I told you, that after a very cold, yet not a directly
affrontive behaviour, to him, they all of a sudden 
(a)  became more violent, and proceeded to personal
insults; which brought on, at last, the unhappy
rencounter between my brother and him. 
Now you must know, that from the last conversation
which passed between my aunt and me, it
comes out, that this sudden vehemence on my brother's
and sister's parts, was owing to stronger reasons
than to the college-begun antipathy on his side, or to
slighted love on hers; to wit, to an apprehension
that my uncles intended to follow my grandfather's
example, in my favour; at least, in a higher degree than
they wish they should: An apprehension founded, it
seems, on a conversation between my two uncles, and
my brother and sister; which my aunt communicated
to me in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon
me to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble settlements; urging
that such a seasonable compliance would frustrate my
brother's and sister's views, and establish me for ever
in the opinion and love of my father and uncles. 
I will give you the substance of this communicated
conversation, after I have made a brief introductory
observation or two: Which, however, I hardly need
to make to you, who are so well acquainted with us
all, did not the series or thread of the story require it. 
I have more than once mentioned to you the darling
view some of us have long had of raising a family
as it is called: A reflection, as I have often thought,
upon our own; which is no inconsiderable or upstart 

one, on either side: Of my mamma's, especially. — 
A view too frequently, it seems, entertained by families,
which having great substance, cannot be satisfy'd
without rank and title. 
My uncles had once extended this view to each of
us three children; urging, that as they themselves
intended not to marry, we each of us might be so
portion'd, and so advantageously matched, as that our
posterity, if not ourselves, might make a first figure
in our country—While my brother, as the only son,
thought the two girls might be very well provided for
by ten or fifteen thousand pounds apiece: And that all
the real estates in the family, to wit, my grandfather's,
father's, and two uncles, and the remainder of their
respective personal estates, together with what he had
an expectancy of from his godmother, would make
such a noble fortune, and give him such an interest,
as might intitle him to hope for a peerage: Nothing
less would satisfy his ambition. 
With this view, he gave himself airs very early; 
‘That his grandfather and uncles were his stewards: 
That no man ever had better: That daughters were
but incumbrances and drawbacks upon a family:’ 
And this low and familiar expression was often in his
mouth, and utter'd always with the self-complaisance
which an imagin'd happy thought can be supposed to
give the speaker; to wit, ‘That a man who has sons
brings up chickens for his own table;’ (tho' once
I made his comparison stagger with him, by asking
him, If the sons, to make it hold, were to have their
necks wrung off?); ‘whereas daughters are chickens
brought up for the tables of other men.’ This, accompanied
with the equally polite reflection, ‘That,
to induce people to take them off their hands, the
family-stock must be impaired into the bargain,’ 
used to put my sister out of all patience: And altho'
she now seems to think a younger sister only can be
an incumbrance, she was then often proposing to me 

to make a party in our own favour against my brother's
rapacious views, as she used to call them: 
While I was for considering the liberties he took of
this sort, as the effect of a temporary pleasantry; 
which in a young man not naturally good-humour'd,
I was glad to see; or as a foible, that deserv'd raillery,
but no other notice. 
But when my grandfather's will (of the purport of
which in my particular favour, until it was open'd, I
was as ignorant as they) had lopp'd off one branch of
my brother's expectation, he was extremely dissatisfy'd
with me. No-body indeed was pleased: For altho'
every-one loved me, yet being the youngest child,
father, uncles, brother, sister, all thought themselves
postpon'd, as to matter of right and power (Who loves
not power?): And my father himself could not bear
that I should be made sole, as I may call it, and independent; 
for such the will, as to that estate, and the
powers it gave (unaccountably, as they all said), made
me. 
To obviate therefore every one's jealousy, I gave
up to my father's management, as you know, not
only the estate, but the money bequeathed me (which
was a moiety of what my grandfather had by him at
his death; the other moiety being bequeathed to my
sister); contenting myself to take, as from his bounty,
what he was pleased to allow me, without desiring the
least addition to my annual stipend. And then I hoped
I had laid all envy asleep: But still my brother and sister
(jealous, as now is evident, of my two uncles favour
for me, and of the pleasure I had given my father
and them, by this act of duty) were every-now-and-then
occasionally doing me covert ill offices: Which
I took the less notice of; having, as I imagin'd, removed
the cause of their envy; and imputed every
thing of that sort to the petulance they are both pretty
much noted for. 

My brother's acquisition then took place: This
made us all very happy; and he went down to take
possession of it: And his absence (on so good an account
too) made us still happier. —Then follow'd Lord
M.'s proposal for my sister: And this was an additional
felicity for the time. I have told you how exceedingly
good-humour'd it made my sister. 
You know how that went off: You know what
came on in its place. 
My brother then return'd; and we were all wrong
again: And Bella, as I observ'd in my letters above-mention'd,
had an opportunity to give herself the credit
of having refused Mr. Lovelace, on the score of his
reputed faulty morals. This united my brother and
sister in one cause. They set themselves on all occasions
to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and his family too,
(a family which deserves nothing but respect): And
this gave rise to the conversation I am leading to, between
my uncles and them: Of which I now come to
give the particulars; after I have observed, that it happen'd
before the rencounter, and soon after the inquiry
made into Mr. Lovelace's affairs had come out better
than my brother and sister hoped or expected (a) . 
They were bitterly inveighing against him, in their
usual way, strengthening their invectives with some
new stories in his disfavour; when my uncle Antony,
having given them a patient hearing, declar'd, ‘That
he thought the gentleman behav'd like a gentleman; 
his niece Clary with prudence; and that a more honourable
alliance for the family, as he had often told
them, could not be wished for: Since Mr. Lovelace
had a very good paternal estate; and that, by the
evidence of an enemy, all clear: Nor did it appear,
that he was so bad a man as had been represented: 
Wild indeed; but it was at a gay time of life: He
was a man of sense: And he was sure that his niece
would not have him, if she had not good reason to 

think him reform'd, or, by her own example, likely
to be so.’ 
He then gave one instance, my aunt told me, as a
proof of a generosity in his spirit, which shew'd him,
he said, to be no very bad man in nature; and of a
temper, he was pleased to say, like my own: Which
was, that when he, my uncle, had represented to him,
that he might, if he pleased (as he had heard Lord M.
say), make three or four hundred pounds a year of his
paternal estate, more than he did; he answer'd, ‘That
his tenants paid their rents well: That it was a
maxim with his family, from which he would by no
means depart, never to rack-rent old tenants, or
their descendants; and that it was a pleasure to him,
to see all his tenants look fat, sleek, and contented.’ 
I indeed had once occasionally heard him say something
like this; and thought he never looked so well
as at the time;—except once; on this occasion: 
An unhappy tenant came petitioning to my uncle
Antony for forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's presence. 
When he had fruitlesly withdrawn, Mr. Lovelace
pleaded his cause so well, that the man was called in
again, and had his suit granted. And Mr. Lovelace
privately follow'd him out, and gave him two guineas,
for present relief; the man having declared, that, at
the time, he had not five shillings in the world. 
On this occasion, he told my uncle of the good
action I hinted at, and that without any ostentatious
airs; to wit, That he had once observed an old tenant
and his wife in a very mean habit at church; and
questioning them about it next day, as he knew they
had no hard bargain in their farm, the man said, he
had done some very foolish things with a good intention,
which had put him behind-hand, and he could
not have paid his rent, and appear better. He asked
him, how long it would take him to retrieve the foolish
step he had made. He said, perhaps two or three
years. Well then, said he, I will abate you five pounds 

a year for seven years, provided you will lay it out
upon your wife and self, that you may make a Sunday
appearance like MY tenants. Mean time take This
(putting his hand in his pocket, and giving him five
guineas), to put yourselves in present plight; and let
me see you next Sunday at church, hand in hand,
like an honest and loving couple; and I bespeak you
to dine with me afterwards. 
Altho' this pleased me when I heard it, as giving
an instance of generosity and prudence at the same
time, not lessening, as my uncle took notice, the
yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had no
throbs, no glows upon it;—upon my word, I had not. 
Nevertheless I own to you, that I could not help saying
to myself on the occasion, ‘Were it ever to be
my lot to have this man, he would not hinder me
from pursuing the methods I so much delight to
take.’ —With ‘A pity, that such a man were not
uniformly good!’ 
Forgive me this digression. 
My uncle went on, my aunt told me, ‘That, besides
his paternal estate, he was the immediate heir
to very splendid fortunes: That, when he was in
treaty for his niece Arabella, Lord M. told him,
what great things he and his two half-sisters intended
to do for him, in order to qualify him for the title
(which would be extinct at his Lordship's death); and
which they hoped to procure for him, or a still
higher, that of those Ladies father, which had been
for some time extinct, on failure of heirs male: That
this view made his relations so earnest for his marrying: 
That as he saw not where Mr. Lovelace
could better himself; so, truly, he thought there
was wealth enough in their own family to build up
three considerable ones: That therefore, he must
needs say, he was the more desirous of this alliance,
as there was a great probability, not only from Mr.
Lovelace's descent, but from his fortunes, that his niece 

Clarissa might one day be a peeress of Great Britain: 
—And upon that prospect (here was the mortifying
stroke) he should, for his own part, think it not
wrong, to make such dispositions as should contribute
to the better support of the dignity.’ 
My uncle Harlowe, it seems, far from disapproving
of what his brother had said, declar'd, ‘That there
was but one objection to an alliance with Mr. Lovelace; 
to wit, his morals: Especially as so much could
be done for Miss Bella, and for my brother too, by my
father; and as my brother was actually possessed of
a considerable estate, by virtue of the deed of gift
and will of his godmother Lovell.’ 
Had I known this before, I should the less have
wonder'd at many things I have been unable to account
for in my brother's and sister's behaviour to me; and
been more on my guard than I imagin'd there was a
necessity to be. 
You may easily guess how much this conversation
affected my brother at the time. He could not, you
know, but be very uneasy, to hear two of his stewards
talk at this rate to his face. 
He had from early days, by his violent temper,
made himself both feared and courted by the whole
family. My father himself, as I have lately mentioned,
very often (long before his acquisitions had
made him still more assuming) gave way to him, as to
an only son, who was to build up the name, and augment
the honour of it. Little inducement therefore
had he to correct a temper, which gave him so much
consideration with every-body. 
‘See, sister Bella,’ said he, in an indecent passion
before my uncles, on the occasion I have mention'd— 
‘See how it is! —You and I ought to look about us! 
—This little Syren is in a fair way to out-uncle, as
well as out-grandfather us both!’ 
From this time, as I now find it plain upon recollection,
did my brother and sister behave to me, as to 

one who stood in their way (sometimes as to a
creature in love with their common enemy); and
to each other, as having but one interest: And were
resolved therefore to bend all their force to hinder an
alliance from taking effect, which they believed was
likely to oblige them to contract their views. 
And how was this to be done, after such a declaration
from both my uncles? 
My brother found out the way. My sister, as I
have said, went hand in hand with him. Between
them, the family union was broken, and every-one
was made uneasy. Mr. Lovelace was received more
and more coldly by all: But not being to be put out
of his course by slights only, personal affronts succeeded; 
defiances next; then the rencounter: That,
as you have heard, did the business: And now, if I
do not oblige them, my grandfather's estate is to be
litigated with me; and I, who never designed to take
advantage of the independency bequeathed me, am to
be as dependent upon my papa's will, as a daughter
ought to be who knows not what is good for herself. 
This is the language of the family now. 
But if I will suffer myself to be prevailed upon,
how happy, as they lay it out, shall we all be! — 
Such presents am I to have, such jewels, and I cannot
tell what, from every one of the family! Then
Mr. Solmes's fortunes are so great, and his proposals
so very advantageous (no relation whom he values),
that there will be abundant room to raise mine upon
them, were the high-intended favours of my own
relations to be quite out of the question. Moreover
it is now, with this view, found out, that I have
qualifications, which, of themselves, will be a full
equivalent to him for the settlements he is to make
me; and leave him, as well as them, under an obligation
to me for my compliance. He himself thinks
so, I am told; so very poor a creature is he, even in
his own, as well as in their eyes. 

These charming views answer'd, how rich, how
splendid, shall we all three be! And I—what obligations
shall I lay upon them all! —And that only
by doing an act of duty so suitable to my character,
and manner of thinking;—if indeed I am the generous, as well as dutiful creature, I have hitherto made
them believe I am. 
This is the bright side that is turn'd to my father
and uncles, to captivate them: But I am afraid, that
my brother's and sister's design is to ruin me with
them at any rate. Were it otherwise, would they
not, on my return from you, have rather sought to
court than frighten me into measures their hearts are
so much bent to carry? A method they have followed
ever since. 
Mean time, orders are given to all the servants to
shew the highest respect to Mr. Solmes; the generous
Mr. Solmes is now his character with some of our
family! But are not these orders a tacit confession,
that they think his own merit will not procure him
respect? He is accordingly, in every visit he makes,
not only highly caressed by the principals of our family,
but obsequiously attended and cring'd to by
the menials. —And the noble settlements are echoed
from every mouth. 
Noble is the word used to inforce the offers of a
man, who is mean enough avowedly to hate, and
wicked enough to propose to rob of their just expectations,
his own family (every one of which at the
same time stands in too much need of his favour),
in order to settle all he is worth upon me; and, if I
die without children, and he has none by any other
marriage, upon a family which already abounds. Such
are his proposals. 
But were there no other motive to induce me to
despise the upstart man, is not this unjust one to his
family enough? —The upstart man, I repeat; for he
was not born to the immense riches he is possessed of: 

Riches left by one niggard to another, in injury to
the next heir, because that other is a niggard. And
should I not be as culpable, do you think, in my acceptance
of such unjust settlements, as he in the offer
of them, if I could persuade myself to be a sharer in
them, or suffer a reversionary expectation of possessing
them to influence my choice? 
Indeed it concerns me not a little, that my friends
could be brought to encourage such offers on such
motives as I think a person of conscience should not
presume to begin the world with. 
But this, it seems, is the only method that can be
taken to disappoint Mr. Lovelace; and at the same
time to answer all my relations have to wish for each
of us. And sure I will not stand against such an accession
to the family, as may happen from marrying
Mr. Solmes: Since now a possibility is discover'd
(which such a grasping mind as my brother's can
easily turn into a probability), that my grandfather's
estate will revert to it, with a much more considerable
one of the man's own. Instances of estates falling
in, in cases far more unlikely than this, are insisted
on; and my sister says, in the words of an old saw,
It is good to be related to an estate. 
While Solmes, smiling no doubt to himself at a
hope so remote, by offers only, obtains all their interests; 
and doubts not to join to his own the estate I
am envied for; which, for the conveniency of its
situation between two of his, will it seems be of
twice the value to him that it would be of to any
other person; and is therefore, I doubt not, a stronger
motive with him than the wise. 
These, my dear, seem to me the principal inducements
of my relations to espouse, so vehemently as they
do, this man's suit. And here, once more, must I deplore
the family-fault, which gives those inducements
such a force, as it will be difficult to resist. 

And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes
and me come out as they will, my brother has succeeded
in his views: that is to say, he has, in the first
place, got my Father to make the cause his own,
and to insist upon my compliance as an act of duty. 
My Mamma has never thought fit to oppose my
father's will, when once he has declar'd himself determin'd. 
My Uncles, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous
bachelors, give me leave to say, tho' very worthy
gentlemen in the main, have as high notions of a
child's duty, as of a wife's obedience; in the last of
which, my mamma's meekness has confirm'd them,
and given them greater reason to expect the first. 
My aunt Hervey (not extremely happy in her
own nuptials, and perhaps under some little obligation)
is got over, and chooses not to open her lips in
my favour, against the wills of a father and uncles so
determin'd. 
This passiveness in her and in my mamma, in a
point so contrary to their own first judgments, is too
strong a proof that my papa is absolutely resolv'd. 
Their treatment of my worthy Mrs. Norton is a
sad confirmation of it: A woman deserving of all consideration
for her wisdom; and every-body thinking
so; but who, not being wealthy enough to have due
weight in a point against which she has given her opinion,
and which they seem bent upon carrying, is
restrain'd from visiting here, and even from corresponding
with me, as I am this very day inform'd. 
Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and
this great motive paternal authority! —What a force
united!—when, singly, each consideration is sufficient
to carry all before it! 
This is the formidable appearance which the address
of this disagreeable man wears at present! 
My Brother and my Sister triumph. —They
have got me down, is their expression, as Hannah, overhearing 

hearing them, tells me. And so they have (yet I never
knew that I was insolently up); for now my brother
will either lay me under an obligation to comply,
to my own unhappiness, and so make me an instrument
of his revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuse,
throw me into disgrace with my whole family. 
Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried
on by undermining courtiers against one another,
when a private family, but three of which can possibly
have clashing interests, and one of them, as she presumes
to think, above such low motives, cannot be
free from them? 
What at present most concerns me, is, the peace of
my mamma's mind! How can the husband of such a
wife (a good man too! —But oh! this prerogative of
manhood!) be so posi-tive, so unper-suade-able, to
one who has brought into the family, means, which
they know so well the value of, that methinks they
should value her the more for their sake! 
They do indeed value her: But, I am sorry to say,
she has purchased that value by her compliances: Yet
has merit for which she ought to be venerated; prudence
which ought of itself to be trusted and conformed
to in every-thing. 
But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverse
girl take these liberties with relations so very respectable,
and whom she highly respects? —What an unhappy
situation is that which obliges her, in her own
defence as it were, to expose their failings? 
But you, who know how much I love and reverence
my mamma, will judge what a difficulty I am
under, to be obliged to oppose a scheme which she
has engaged in. Yet I must oppose it (to comply is impossible),
and must declare without delay my opposition,
or my difficulties will increase; since, as I am just now
inform'd, a lawyer has been this very day consulted
(would you have believ'd it?) in relation to settlements. 

Were ours a Roman Catholic family, how much
happier for me, that they thought a Nunnery would
answer all their views! —How happy, had not a certain
person slighted somebody! All then would have been
probably concluded on between them before my brother
had arrived to thwart the match: Then had I had a
sister; which now I have not; and two brothers;— 
both aspiring; possibly both titled: While I should
only have valued that in either which is above title,
that which is truly noble in both! 
But what long-reaching selfishness is my brother
govern'd by! By what remote, exceedingly remote
views! —Views, which it is in the power of the
slightest accident, of a fever, for instance (the seeds
of which are always vegetating, as I may say, and
ready to burst forth, in his own impetuous temper),
or of the provoked weapon of an adversary, to blow
up, and destroy! 
I will break off here. Let me write ever so freely
of my friends, I am sure of your kind construction: 
And I confide in your discretion, that you will avoid
reading to or transcribing for others, such passages as
may have the appearance of treating too freely the
parental, or even the fraternal character, or induce
others to censure for a supposed failure in duty to the
one, or decency to the other, 
Your truly affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 