



My dear Father and Mother,
I Will continue my Writing still, because, may-be,
I shall like to read it, when I am with you, to
see what Dangers God has enabled me to escape; 
and tho' I bring it in my Pocket. 
I told you my Resolution, my happy Resolution,
which, to be sure God inspired me with. And just
then he came in again, with great Kindness in his
Looks, and said, I make no doubt, Pamela, you
will stay this Fortnight to oblige me. I knew not
how to frame my Words so as to deny, and yet
not make him storm. But, said I, Forgive, Sir, your
poor distressed Maiden. I know I cannot possibly
deserve any Favour at your Hands, consistent with
my Honesty; and I beg you will let me go to my
poor Father. Why, said he, thou art the veriest
Fool that I ever knew. I tell you I will see your
Father; I'll send for him here to-morrow, in my
Travelling Chariot, if you will; and I'll let him know
what I intend to do for him and you. What, Sir,
may I ask you, can that be? Your Honour's noble
Estate may easily make him happy, and not unuseful
perhaps to you in some respect or other. But
what Price am I to pay for all this? –––You shall be
happy as you can wish, said he, I do assure you:
And here I will now give you this Purse, in which 

are Fifty Guineas, which I will allow your Father
yearly, and find an Employ suitable to his Liking,
to deserve that and more: Pamela, he shall never
want, depend upon it. I would have given you
still more for him; but that perhaps you'd suspect I
intended it as a Design upon you. –––O Sir, said I,
take back your Guineas, I will not touch one, nor
will my Father, I am sure, till he knows what is to
be done for them; and particularly what is to become
of me. Why then, Pamela, said he, suppose
I find a Man of Probity and genteel Calling for a
Husband for you, that shall make you a Gentlewoman
as long as you live? —I want no Husband, Sir,
said I; for now I begun to see him in all his black
Colours! —But being in his Power so, I thought I
would a little dissemble. But, said he, you are so
pretty, that go where you will, you will never be
free from the Designs of some or other of our Sex; 
and I shall think I don't answer the Care of my dying
Mother for you, who committed you to me, if I
don't provide you a Husband, to protect your Virtue
and your Innocence; and a worthy one I have
thought of for you. 
O black, perfidious Creature, thought I! what an
Implement art thou in the Hands of Lucifer, to ruin
the innocent Heart! –––But still I dissembled; for I
fear'd much both him and the Place I was in. But
who, pray Sir, have you thought of? –––Why, said
he, young Mr. Williams, my Chaplain in Lincolnshire,
who will make you happy. Does he know,
Sir, said I, any thing of your Honour's Intentions? ––– 
No, my Girl, said he, and kissed me (much against
my Will; for his very Breath was now Poison to
me!) but his Dependence on my Favour, and your
Beauty and Merit, will make him rejoice at my
Goodness to him. —Well, Sir, said I, then it is
time enough to consider of this Matter; and this 

cannot hinder me from going to my Father's: For
what will staying a Fortnight longer signify to this? 
Your Honour's Care and Goodness may extend to
me there as well as here; and Mr. Williams, and all
the World, shall know that I am not ashamed of my
Father's Poverty. 
He would kiss me again, and I said, If I am to
think of Mr. Williams, or any body else, I beg you'll
not be so free with me: That is not pretty I'm sure. 
Well, said he, but you stay this next Fortnight, and
in that time I'll have both Williams and your Father
here; for I will have the Match concluded in my
House; and when I have brought it on; you shall
settle it as you please together. Mean time take and
send only these Fifty Pieces to your Father, as an
Earnest of my Favour, and I'll make you all happy. — 
Sir, said I, I beg at least two Hours to consider of
this. I shall, said he, be gone out in one Hour, and
I would have you write to your Father, what I propose,
and John shall carry it on purpose; and he
shall carry the Purse with him for the good old Man,
if you approve it. Sir, said I, I will let you know
in one Hour then my Resolution. Do so, said he; 
and gave me another Kiss, and let me go. 
O how I rejoiced I had got out of his Clutches! 
–––So I write you this, that you may see how Matters
stand; for I am resolv'd to come away, if possible. 
Base, wicked, treacherous Gentleman, as he is! 
So here was a Trap laid for your poor Pamela! I
tremble to think of it! –––O what a Scene of Wickedness
was here laid down for all my wretched
Life. Black-hearted Wretch! How I hate him! ––– 
For at first, as you'll see by what I have written, he
would have made me believe other things; and this
of Mr. Williams, I believe, came into his Head
after he walked out from his Closet, as I suppose,
to give himself time to think, as well as me, how 

to delude me better: But the Covering was now too
thin, and easy to be seen through. 
I went to my Chamber, and the first thing I did,
was to write to him; for I thought it was best not
to see him again, if I could help it; and I put it
under his Parlour-door, after I had copy'd it, as
follows: 

‘Honour'd Sir,
Your last Proposal to me, convinces me, that
I ought not to stay; but to go to my Father,
if it were but to ask his Advice about Mr. Williams. 
And I am so set upon it, that I am not to be persuaded. 
So, honour'd Sir, with a thousand Thanks
for all Favours, I will set out to-morrow early; and
the Honour you design'd me, as Mrs. Jervis tells
me, of your Chariot, there will be no Occasion for; 
because I can hire, I believe, Farmer Brady's Chaise. 
So begging you will not take it amiss, I shall ever be 
‘Your dutiful Servant. 
‘As to the Purse, Sir, my poor Father, to be sure,
won't forgive me, if I take it, till he can know
how to deserve it. Which is impossible.’ 

So he has since sent Mrs. Jervis to tell me, that
since I am resolv'd to go, go I may, and the Travelling
Chariot shall be ready; but it shall be worse
for me; for that he will never trouble himself
about me as long as he lives. Well, so I get out
of the House, I care not; only I should have been
glad I could, with Innocence, have made you, my
poor Parents, happy. 
I cannot imagine the Reason of it, but John, who
I thought was gone with my last, is but now going; 
and he sends to know if I have any thing else to 

carry. So I break off to send you this with the
former. 
I am now preparing for my Journey; and about
taking Leave of my good Fellow-servants. And if
I have not time to write, I must tell you the rest,
when I am so happy as to be with you. 
One Word more, I slip in a Paper of Verses, on
my going; sad poor Stuff! but as they come from
me, you'll not dislike them, may-be. I shew'd them
to Mrs. Jervis, and she liked them; and took a
Copy; and made me sing them to her, and in the
green Room too; but I looked into the Closet first. 
I will only add, that I am 
Your dutiful Daughter. 
Let me just say, that he has this Moment sent me
five Guineas by Mrs. Jervis, as a Present for
my Pocket; so I shall be very rich; for as she
brought them, I thought I might take them. 
He says he won't see me: And I may go when
I will in the Morning. And Lincolnshire Robin
shall drive me; but he is so angry, he orders
that nobody shall go out at the Door with me,
not so much as into the Court-yard. Well! I
can't help it, not I! but does not this expose
him more than me? 
But John waits, and I would have brought this and
the other myself; but he says, he has put it up
among other things, and so can take both as
well as one. 
John is very good, and very honest, God reward
him! I'd give him a Guinea, now I'm so rich,
if I thought he'd take it. I hear nothing of my
Lady's Cloaths, and those my Master gave me: 
For I told Mrs. Jervis, I would not take them; 
but I fansy, by a Word or two that was dropt,
they will be sent after me. Dear Sirs! what a 

rich Pamela you'll have, if they should! But as
I can't wear them, if they do, I don't desire
them; and will turn them into Money, as I
can have Opportunity. Well, no more—I'm
in a fearful Hurry! 

Verses on my going away.


I.
My Fellow servants, dear, attend
 To these few Lines, which I have penn'd:
I'm sure they're from your honest Friend,
 And Wisher-well, poor Pamela.


II.
I from a State of low Degree
Was taken by our good Lady.
Some say it better had been for me,
 I'd still been rustick Pamela.


III.
But yet, my Friends, I hope not so:
For, tho' I to my Station low
Again return, I joyful go,
 And think no Shame to Pamela.


IV.
For what makes out true Happiness,
But Innocence, and inward Peace?
And that, thank God, I do possess:
 O happy, happy Pamela!


V.
My future Lot I cannot know:
But this, I'm sure, where-e'er I go,
What-e'er I am, what-e'er I do,
 I'll be the grateful Pamela!



VI.
No sad Regrets my Heart annoy.
I'll pray for all your Peace and Joy
From Master high, to Scullion Boy,
 For all your Loves to  Pamela.


VII.
One thing or two I've more to say;
God's holy Will, be sure obey;
And for our Master always pray;
 As ever shall poor Pamela.


VIII.
For, Oh! we pity should the Great,
Instead of envying their Estate;
Temptations always on 'em wait,
 Exempt from which are such as we.


IX.
Their Riches often are a Snare;
At best, a pamper'd weighty Care:
Their Servants far more happy are:
 At least, so thinketh Pamela.


X.
Your Parents and Relations love:
Let them your Duty ever prove;
And you'll be blessed from above,
 As will, I hope, poor Pamela.


XI.
For if ashamed I could be
Of my poor Parents low Degree,
I'm sure it would been worse for me,
 God had not blessed Pamela.



XII.
Thrice happy may you ever be,
Each one in his and her Degree;
And, Sirs, whene'er you think of me,
 Pray for Content to Pamela.


XIII.
Yes, pray for my Content and Peace;
For, rest assur'd, I'll never cease
To pray for all your Joys Increase,
 While Life is lent to Pamela.


XIV.
On God all future Good depends:
Him let us serve. My Sonnet ends;
With Thank-ye, Thank-ye, honest Friends,
 For all your Loves to Pamela.


Here it is necessary to observe, that the fair Pamela's
Tryals were not yet over; but the worst of all were
to come, at a Time when she thought them all at
an End, and that she was returning to her Father:
For when her Master found her Virtue was not to
be subdu'd, and that he had in vain try'd to conquer
his Passion for her, being a Gentleman of Pleasure
and Intrigue, he had order'd his Lincolnshire Coachman
to bring his Travelling Chariot from thence,
not caring to trust his Body Coachman, who, with
the rest of the Servants, so greatly loved and honour'd
the fair Damsel; and having given him Instructions
accordingly, and prohibited his other Servants, on
Pretence of resenting Pamela's Behaviour, from accompanying
her any Part of the Way, he drove her
five Miles on the Way to her Father's; and then turning
off, cross'd the Country, and carried her onward
towards his Lincolnshire Estate. 

It is also to be observ'd, that the Messenger of her
Letters to her Father, who so often pretended Business
that way, was an Implement in his Master's
Hands, and employ'd by him for that Purpose; and
who always gave her Letters first to him, and his
Master used to open and read them, and then send
them on; by which means, as he hints to her (as she
observes in one of her Letters, p. 104.) he was no
Stranger to what she wrote. Thus every way was
the poor Virgin beset: And the Whole will shew
the base Arts of designing Men to gain their wicked
Ends; and how much it behoves the Fair Sex to
stand upon their Guard against their artful Contrivances,
especially when Riches and Power conspire
against Innocence and a low Estate. 
A few Words more will be necessary to make the
Sequel better understood. The intriguing Gentleman
thought fit, however, to keep back from her
Father her three last Letters; in which she mentions
his concealing himself to hear her partitioning
out her cloaths, his last Effort to induce her to
stay a Fortnight, his pretended Proposal of the Chaplain,
and her Hopes of speedily seeing them, as also
her Verses; and to send himself a Letter to her Father,
which is as follows. 

‘Goodman Andrews,
You will wonder to receive a Letter from
me. But I think I am obliged to let you
know, that I have discover'd the strange Correspondence
carry'd on between you and your
Daughter, so injurious to my Honour and Reputation,
and which I think you should not have
encourag'd till you knew the Truth of it. Something,
possibly, there might be in what she has
wrote from time to time; but, believe me, with 

all her pretended Simplicity and Innocence, I never
knew so much romantick Invention as she is
Mistress of. In short, the Girl's Head's turn'd by
Romances, and such idle Stuff, which she has given
herself up to, ever since her kind Lady's Death. 
And she assumes such Airs, as if she was a Mirror
of Perfection, and believ'd every body had a
Design upon her. Nay, she has not, I understand,
spared me, who used to joke and divert myself
with her Innocence, as I thought it. 
‘Don't mistake me however; I believe her very
honest, and very virtuous; but I have found out
also, that she is carrying on a sort of Correspondence,
or Love Affair, with a young Clergyman,
that I hope in time to provide for; but who, at
present, is destitute of any Subsistence but my Favour:
And what would be the Consequence, can
you think of two young Folks, who have nothing
in the World to trust to of their own, to come
together, with a Family multiplying upon them,
before they have Bread to eat? 
‘For my Part, I have too much Kindness to them
both, not to endeavour to prevent it, if I can: And
for this Reason I have sent her out of his Way
for a little while, till I can bring them to better
Consideration; and I would not therefore have
you surpriz'd you don't see your Daughter so soon
as you might possibly expect. 
‘Yet, I do assure you, upon my Honour, that
she shall be safe and inviolate; and I hope you
don't doubt me, notwithstanding any Airs she may
have given herself, upon my jocular Pleasantry to
her, and perhaps a little innocent Romping with
her, so usual with young Folks of the two Sexes,
when they have been long acquainted, and grown
up together; for Pride is not my Talent. 

‘As she is a mighty Letter-writer, I hope she has
had the Duty to apprise you of her Intrigue with
the young Clergyman; and I know not whether
it meets with your Countenance: But now she is
absent for a little while, (for I know he would
have follow'd her to your Village, if she had gone
home; and there perhaps they would have ruin'd
one another, by marrying) I doubt not I shall
bring him to see his Interest, and that he engages
not before he knows how to provide for a Wife:
And when that can be done, let them come together
in God's Name, for me. 
‘I expect not to be answer'd on this Head, but
by your good Opinion, and the Confidence you
may repose in my Honour; being 
‘Your hearty Friend to serve you. 
‘P. S. I find my Man John has been the Manager
of the Correspondence, in which such Liberties
have been taken with me. I shall soon
let the sawcy Fellow know how much I resent
his Part of the Affair, in a manner that becomes
me. It is a hard thing, that a Man of
my Character in the world, should be used
thus freely by his own Servants.’ 

It is easy to guess at the poor old Man's Concern
upon reading this Letter, from a Gentleman of so
much Consideration. He knew not what Course to
take, and had no manner of Doubt of his poor
Daughter's Innocence, and that foul Play was design'd
her. Yet he sometimes hoped the best, and
was ready to believe the surmised Correspondence
between the Clergyman and her, having not receiv'd
the Letters she wrote, which would have clear'd up
that Affair. 

But after all, he resolved, as well to quiet his own
as his Wife's Uneasiness, to undertake a Journey to
the 'Squire's; and leaving his poor Wife to excuse
him to the Farmer who imploy'd him, he sat out
that very Night, late as it was; and travelling all
Night, he found himself soon after Day-light, at the
Gate of the Gentleman, before the Family was up:
And there he sat down to rest himself, till he should
see somebody stirring. 
The Grooms were the first he saw, coming out
to water their Horses; and he ask'd, in so distressful
a manner, what was become of Pamela, that they
thought him crasy; and said, Why, what have you
to do with Pamela, old Fellow? Get out of the
Horse's Way. —Where is your Master? said the poor
Man; pray, Gentlemen, don't be angry: My Heart's
almost broke. –––He never gives any thing at the Door,
I assure you, says one of the Grooms; so you'll lose
your Labour. –––I am not a Beggar yet, said the poor
old Man; I want nothing of him, but my Pamela! ––– 
O my Child! my Child! 
I'll be hang'd, says one of them, if this is not Mrs.
Pamela's Father! —Indeed, indeed, said he, wringing
his Hands, I am; and weeping, Where is my
Child? Where is my Pamela? —Why, Father, said
one of them, we beg your Pardon; but she is gone
home to you! How long have you been come from
home? –––O but last Night, said he; I have travelled
all Night! Is the 'Squire at home, or is he not? ––– 
Yes, but he is not stirring tho', said the Grooms, as
yet. Thank God for that, said he! thank God for
that! then I hope I may be permitted to speak to
him anon. They asked him to go in, and he stept
into the Stable, and sat down on the Stairs there,
wiping his Eyes, and sighing so sadly, that it grieved
the Servants to hear him. 

The Family was soon raised, with the Report of
Pamela's Father coming to inquire after his Daughter; 
and the Maids would fain have had him go into the
Kitchen. But Mrs. Jervis having been told of his
coming, got up, and hasten'd down to her Parlour,
and took him in with her, and there heard all his sad
Story, and read the Letter. She wept bitterly; but
yet endeavoured to hide her Concern; and said,
Well, Goodman Andrews, I cannot help weeping at
your Grief; but I hope there is no Occasion; let
nobody see this Letter, whatever you do. I dare
say your Daughter's safe. 
Well, but said he, I see you, Madam, know nothing
about her! –––If all was right, so good a Gentlewoman
as you are, would not have been a Stranger
to this. To be sure you thought she was with me! 
Said she, My Master does not always inform his
Servants of his Proceedings; but you need not doubt
his Honour. You have his Hand for it. And you
may see he can have no Design upon her, because
he is not from hence, and does not talk of going
hence. O that is all I have to hope for, said he!
that is all, indeed! —But, said he, and was going on,
when the Report of his coming had reach'd the
'Squire, who came down in his Morning-gown and
Slippers, into the Parlour, where he and Mrs. Jervis
was. 
What's the Matter, Goodman Andrews? said he; 
what's the Matter? O my Child, said the good old
Man, give me my Child, I beseech you, Sir. — 
Why, I thought, says the 'Squire, that I had satisfy'd
you about her; sure you have not a Letter I sent
you, written with my own Hand. Yes, yes, but I
have, Sir, said he, and that brought me hither; and
I have walked all Night. Poor Man! return'd he,
with great seeming Compassion, I am sorry for it
truly! Why your Daughter has made a strange Racket 

in my Family; and if I thought it would have
disturb'd you so much, I would have e'en let her
gone home; but what I did was to serve her and
you too. She is very safe, I do assure you, Goodman
Andrews; and you may take my Honour for
it, I would not injure her for the World. Do you
think I would; Mrs. Jervis? No, I hope not, Sir,
said she! —Hope not! said the poor Man, so do I; 
but pray, Sir, give me my Child; that is all I desire; 
and I'll take care no Clergyman shall come
near her. 
Why, London is a great way off, said the 'Squire,
and I can't send for her back presently. What then,
said he, have you sent my poor Pamela to London? 
I would not have it said so, says the 'Squire; but I
assure you, upon my Honour, she is quite safe and
satisfied, and will quickly inform you of as much
by Letter. I am sure she is in a reputable Family,
no less than a Bishop's, and will wait on his Lady till
I get this Matter over, that I mentioned to you! 
O how shall I know this! reply'd he. –––What, said
the 'Squire, pretending Anger, am I to be doubted? 
—Do you believe I can have any View upon
your Daughter! And if I had, do you think I would
take such Methods as these to effect it? Why,
Man, you know not who you talk to! –––O Sir, said
he, I beg your Pardon; but consider my dear Child
is in the Case: Let me know what Bishop, and
where, and I will travel to London barefoot, to see
my Daughter, and then shall be satisfied. 
Why, Goodman Andrews, I think thou hast read
Romances as well as thy Daughter, and thy Head's
turn'd with them. May I not have my Word taken? 
Do you think, once more, I would offer any thing
to your Daughter! Is there any thing looks like
it? –––Pr'ythee, Man, consider a little who I am; and
if I am not to be believ'd, what signifies talking? 

Why, Sir, said he, pray forgive me; but there is
no Harm to say, What Bishop's, or whereabouts? 
What, and so you'd go troubling his Lordship with
your impertinent Fears and Stories! Will you be
satisfied if you have a Letter from her within a Week,
it may be less, if she be not negligent, to assure you
all is well with her? Why that, said the poor Man,
will be a Comfort. Well then, said the 'Squire, I can't
answer for her Negligence, if she don't; but she
will send a Letter to you, Mrs. Jervis, for I desire
not to see it; I have had Trouble enough about her
already; and be sure you send it by a Man and Horse
the Moment you receive it. To be sure I will, said
she. Thank your Honour, said the good Man. And
then I must wait with as much Patience as I can
for a Week, which will be a Year to me. 
I tell you, said the 'Squire, it must be her own
Fault if she don't; for 'tis what I insisted upon for
my own Reputation; and I shan't stir from this House,
I assure you, till she is heard from, and that to Satisfaction. 
God bless your Honour, said the poor Man,
as you say and mean Truth. Amen, Amen, Goodman
Andrews, said he; you see I am not afraid to
say Amen. So, Mrs. Jervis, make the good Man
as welcome as you can; and let me have no Uproar
about the Matter. 
He then, whispering her, bid her give him a couple
of Guineas to bear his Charges home; telling
him, he should be welcome to stay there till the Letter
came, if he would; and he should be a Witness, that
he intended honourably, and not to stir from his
House for one while. 
The poor old Man staid and din'd with Mrs. Jervis,
with some tolerable Ease, in hopes to hear from
his beloved Daughter in a rew Days, and then accepting
the Present, return'd for his own House; and
resolv'd to be as patient as possible for a few Days. 

Mean time Mrs. Jervis, and all the Family, were
in the utmost Grief for the Trick put upon the poor
Pamela, and she and the Steward represented it to
the 'Squire in as moving Terms as they durst: But
were forced to rest satisfy'd with his general Assurances
of intending her no Harm; which however
Mrs. Jervis little believ'd from the Pretence he had
made in his Letter, of the Correspondence between
Pamela and the young Parson; which she knew to
be all Invention; tho' she durst not say any thing
of it. 
But the Week after she went away, they were made
a little more easy, by the following Letter, brought
by an unknown Hand, and left for Mrs. Jervis;
which how procur'd, will be shewn in the Sequel. 

‘Dear Mrs. Jervis,
I Have been vilely trick'd, and, instead of being
driven by Robin to my dear Father's, I am
carry'd off, to where I have no Liberty to tell. 
However, I am at present not used hardly in the
main; and I write to beg of you to let my dear
Father and Mother (whose Hearts must be wellnigh
broken) know, That I am well, and that I am,
and, by the Grace of God, ever will be, their
dutiful and honest Daughter, as well as 
‘Your obliged Friend,
Pamela Andrews. 
‘I must neither send Date nor Place. But have
most solemn Assurances of honourable Usage. 
This is the only Time my low Estate has been
troublesome to me, since it has subjected me to the
Frights I have undergone. Love to your good
self, and all my dear Fellow-servants. Adieu!
Adieu! But pray for poor Pamela.’ 


This, tho' it quieted not intirely their Apprehensions,
was shewn to the whole Family, and to the
'Squire himself, who pretended to know not how it
came; and Mrs. Jervis sent it away to the good
old Folks; who at first suspected it was forged, and
not their Daughter's Hand; but finding the contrary,
they were a little easier to hear she was alive and
well. And having inquir'd of all their Acquaintance,
what could be done, and no one being able to put
them in a way how to proceed, with Effect, on so
extraordinary an Occasion, against so rich and daring
a Gentleman; and being afraid to make Matters
worse, (tho' they saw plainly enough, that by this Letter
she was in no Bishop's Family, and so mistrusted
all the rest of his Story) they apply'd themselves to
Prayers for their poor Daughter, and for a happy
Issue to an Affair that almost distracted them. 
We shall now leave the honest old Pair, praying
for their dear Pamela; and return to the Account
she herself gives of all this; having written it Journal-wife,
to amuse and employ her Time, in hopes some
Opportunity might offer to send it to her Friends,
and, as was her constant View, that she might afterwards
thankfully look back upon the Dangers she had
escaped, when they should be happily over-blown,
as in time she hoped they would be; and that then
she might examine, and either approve of, or repent
for, her own Conduct in them. 

