



Miss Howe, To Miss Arabella Harlowe. 

Sat. July 22. 
It may be the misfortune of some people to engage
every-body's notice: Others may be the happier, tho'
they may be the more envious, for no-body's thinking
them worthy of any. But one would be glad people had
the sense to be thankful for that want of consequence,
which subjected them not to hazards they would hardly
have been able to manage under. 
I own to you, that had it not been for the prudent advice
of that admirable Somebody (whose principal fault is the
superiority of her talents, and whose misfortune to be
brother'd and sister'd by a couple of creatures, who are
not able to comprehend her excellencies), I might at one
time have been plunged into difficulties. But, pert as the 

superlatively pert may think me, I thought not myself
wiser, because I was older; nor for that poor reason qualified
to prescribe to, much less to maltreat, a genius so
outsoaring. 
I repeat it with gratitude, that the dear creature's advice
was of very great service to me—And this before
my mother's watchfulness became necessary. But how it
would have fared with me, I cannot say, had I had a
brother or sister, who had deemed it their interest, as well
as a gratification of their sordid envy, to misrepresent me. 
Your admirable sister, in effect, saved you, Miss, as well
as me—With this difference—You, against your will— 
Me, with mine: And but for your own brother, and his
own sister, would not have been lost herself. 
Would to God both sisters had been obliged with their
own wills! —The most admirable of her sex would never
then have been out of her father's house! —You, Miss—I
don't know what had become of you. —But, let what would
have happened, you would have met with the humanity
you have not shewn, whether you had deserved it or not: 
—Nor, at worst, lost either a kind sister, or a pitying
friend, in the most excellent of sisters. 
But why run I into length to such a poor thing? —Why
push I so weak an adversary? whose first letter is all
low malice, and whose next is made up of falshood and
inconsistence, as well as spite and ill-manners. Yet I was
willing to give you a part of my mind:—Call for more
of it; it shall be at your service: From one, who, tho'
she thanks God she is not your sister, is not your enemy:
But that she is not the latter, is with-held but by two considerations; 
one, that you bear, tho' unworthily, a relation
to a sister so excellent; the other, that you are not of
consequence enough to engage any-thing but the pity and
contempt of 
A. H. 