


Lady Grandison, To Miss Selby. 
[In Continuation of Lady G's Subject.] 


You need not be told, my dear Lucy, that our
charming Lady G. is mistress of penetration. 
Your happy Harriet has been engaged in the most
pleasing conversation. The best of husbands conceals
not from her one emotion of his excellent heart. 
He is greatly distressed for Clementina. It would be
unworthy of his character, if he were not: Yet he
seems to think she may be happy with the Count of
Belvedere: That is the point we have been debating. 
As Sir Charles would have been the man of her
choice, but for an invincible obstacle, is it not owing,
partly to his delicate modesty, that he thinks
she may be so? What think you, Lucy? 
Lady G. says, I make Clementina's case my own. 
Be it so; because so it ought to be. Could I have
been happy with Lord D? –––Call it romantic, if you
please, Lady G; I think it impossible that I could,
even tho' I could not form to myself, that Sir Charles
Grandison himself would make the tender, the indulgent
husband he makes to the happiest of women. 
Sir Charles gave me the particulars of the conversation
that passed between him and Lady Clementina
in the garden. He observed, that she is not a stranger
to the Count's resolution, never to marry while
she remains unmarried; and that it is the intention of
that nobleman to return to Italy, and not go to Spain
at all. Perhaps she had her information either from
Camilla or Laura; who both heard him declare as
much. If she has condescended to hear them talk on
a subject which every body else has studiously avoided,
she may also have heard from them many other particulars
greatly to the Count's honour; for they are
his admirers and well-wishers. 

Sir Charles believes she will take a gracious leave
of the Count before he sets out. 
* *
The solemn, the parting interview, was to have
been in my drawing-room this afternoon: But Lady
Clementina has given the Count an unexpected, and
joyful reprieve. 
She dined in company. We were all charmed
with her free and easy deportment, as well to the
Count, as to every-body else. His was not so easy. 
He, intending to bespeak the favour of half an hour's
audience of her, in order to take leave of her, when
she arose from table, was in visible agitations. How
the poor man trembled! with what awe, with what
reverence, as he sat, did he glance towards her! 
How did ever-body pity him, and by their eyes beseech
her pity for him! yet, in the same moment,
our eyes fell under hers, as she looked upon each
person; we all seeming unwilling to have her think
we entreated for him by them. I thought I read in
her lovely countenance more than once, compassion
for him; yet, the breath hard-fetched, as often shewed
a sigh suppressed, that indicated, I imagined, a wish
(also suppressed) after a life more eligible to her than
the nuptial. 
At last, when we women arose from table, he, as
a man who must address her in haste, or be unable
at all to do it, stept towards her; retreated, when
near her, as irresolute; and again advancing, profoundly
bowing, Madam, madam, said he, hesitatingly
–––putting out his hand, as if he would have
taken hers; but withdrawing it hastily, before he
touched it–––I hope–––I beg–––allow me–––I beseech
you–––one parting moment. 
She pitied his confusion: My Lord, said she, We
see you to-morrow in the afternoon [Allow me, madam,
to me–––] She courtesied to him, and withdrew 

with some little precipitation; but with a dignity
that never forsakes her. 
Every man, it seems, congratulated the Count. 
Every woman (when withdrawn with her) Clementina. 
The Marchioness folded her to her maternal
bosom–––My daughter! My beloved daughter! My
Clementina! was all she said, tears trickling down her
cheeks–––O my mamma! kneeling (affected by her
mother's tears)—O my mamma!—was all the daughter
could say. And rising, took Mrs. Beaumont's
hand, and retired with her to her own apartment. 
* *
We see her now in the garden with that excellent
woman, arm in arm, in earnest talk, as we sit by
the window. 
Wednesday Night. 
And now, my grandmamma, a word or two of
dear Northamptonshire. 
I have a Letter from Emily. I inclose it, with a
copy of my answer. I hope it is not a breach of confidence
to communicate them both to you, and thro'
you, madam, to my aunt Selby. At present, I wish
the contents may be a secret to every-body else. 
Don't let Lucy repine at her distant residence, if
it must be in Ireland. It is generally the privilege
of husbands to draw their wives after them. Sir
Charles says it is but a trip to that kingdom: And
having an estate in it, which he is intent upon improving,
he will be her visitor; and so will his Harriet,
you need not question, if he make her the offer
of accompanying him. To you, my grandmamma,
I know every part of the British dominions, where
your friends have a natural call, is Northamptonshire. 
Lucy's grandmother, however will miss her:
But has not she a Lucy in her Nancy? And has not
her grandson James a chance (if Patty Holles will favour
him) to carry to her another grandaughter? Besides,
Lord Reresby, who is so good-natured a man, 

will not be in haste to quit the county where he has
obtained so rich a prize. Sir Charles expects them
both with him for a month at least, before they leave
England. 
Happy! happy! as the sixteenth of November to me,
may be the twenty-fourth of May to Lucy, prays, 
Her Ever-affectionate
Harriet Grandison. 

