



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

St. Alban's, Tuesday Morn. past One. 
O my dearest friend!
After what I had resolved upon, as by my former,
what shall I write? What can I? With what
consciousness, even by Letter, do I approach you? — 
You will soon hear (if already you have not heard
from the mouth of common fame) that your Clarissa
Harlowe is gone off with a man! 
I am busying myself to give you the particulars at
large. The whole twenty-four hours of each day
(to begin the moment I can fix) shall be employed in
it till it is finished: Every one of the hours, I mean,
that will be spared me by this interrupting man, to
whom I have made myself so foolishly accountable
for too many of them. Rest is departed from me. 
I have no call for That: And That has no balm for
the wounds of my mind. So you'll have all those
hours without interruption till the account is ended. 
But will you receive, shall you be permitted to receive
my Letters, after what I have done? 
O, my dearest friend! —But I must make the best
of it. I hope that will not be very bad! Yet am I
convinced, that I did a rash and inexcuseable thing,
in meeting him; and all his tenderness, all his vows,
cannot pacify my inward reproaches on that account. 
The bearer comes to you, my dear, for the little
parcel of Linen which I sent you with far better and
more agreeable hopes. 
Send not my Letters. Send the Linen only: Except
you will favour me with one line, to tell me, you
love me still; and that you will suspend your censures
till you have the whole before you. I am the readier
to send thus early, because if you have deposited anything 

for me, you may cause it to be taken back, or
with-hold any-thing you had but intended to send. 
Adieu, my dearest friend! —I beseech you to love
me still—But, alas! what will your Mother say? — 
What will mine? —What my other Relations?—and
what my dear Mrs. Norton? And how will my Brother
and Sister triumph!— 
I cannot at present tell you how, or where, you
can direct to me. For very early shall I leave this
place; harassed and fatigued to death. But, when I
can do nothing else, constant use has made me able to
write. Long, very long, has that been all my amusement
and pleasure: Yet could not that have been
such to me, had I not had you, my best-beloved friend,
to write to. Once more adieu. Pity and pray for 
Your
Cl. Harlowe. 