



Colonel Morden, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Sept. 26. 
Dear Sir,
I cannot help congratulating myself as well as you,
that we have already got thro' with the Family
every article of the Will, where they have any concern. 
You left me a discretional power, in many instances; 
and, in pursuance of it, I have had my dear Cousin's
personal jewels valued; and will account to you for
them, at the highest price, when I come to town, as
well as for other matters that you were pleased to entrust
to my management. 
These jewels I have presented to my Cousin Dolly
Hervey, in acknowlegement of her love to the dear
departed. I have told Miss Howe of this; and she is
as well pleased with what I have done, as if she had
been the purchaser of them herself. As that young Lady
has jewels of her own, she could only have wished to
purchase these because they were her beloved friends. 
The Grandmother's jewels are also valued; and the
money will be paid me for you, to be carried to the
Uses of the Will. 
Mrs. Norton is preparing, by general consent, to
enter upon her office as housekeeper at The Grove. But
it is my opinion, that she will not be long on this side
Heaven. 
I waited upon Miss Howe myself, as I told you I
would, with what was bequeathed to her and her Mother. 
You will not be displeased, perhaps, if I make
a few observations with regard to that young Lady, so
dear to my beloved Cousin, as you have not a personal
acquaintance with her. 
There never was a firmer and nobler friendship in
women, than that between my dear Cousin and Miss
Howe, to which this wretched man has given a period. 

Friendship, generally speaking, Mr. Belford, is too
fervent a flame for female minds to manage: A light,
that but in few of their hands burns steady, and often
hurries the Sex into flight and absurdity. Like other
extremes, it is hardly ever durable. Marriage, which
is the highest state of friendship, generally absorbs the
most vehement friendships of female to female; and
that whether the wedlock be happy, or not. 
What female mind is capable of two fervent friendships
at the same time? 
This I mention as a general observation: But the
friendship that subsisted between these two Ladies affords
a remarkable exception to it: Which I account for from
those qualities and attainments in both, which, were
they more common, would furnish more exceptions
still in favour of the Sex. 
Both had an enlarged, and even a liberal education: 
Both had minds thirsting after virtuous knowlege: Great
readers both: Great writers—[And early familiar
writing I take to be one of the greatest openers and improvers
of the mind, that man or woman can be employed
in.] Both generous. High in fortune; therefore
above that dependence each on the other, that frequently
destroys the familiarity which is the cement of
friendship. Both excelling in different ways, in which
neither sought to envy the other. Both blessed with
clear and distinguishing faculties; with solid sense; and
from their first intimacy [I have many of my lights, Sir,
from Mrs. Norton] each seeing something in the other
to fear, as well as to love; yet making it an indispensable
condition of their friendship, each to tell the
other of her failings; and to be thankful for the freedom
taken. One by nature gentle; the other made so, by
her love and admiration of her exalted friend—Impossible
that there could be a friendship better calculated for
duration. 
I must, however, take the liberty to blame Miss
Howe for her behaviour to Mr. Hickman. And I infer 

from it, that even women of sense are not to be trusted
with power. 
By the way, I am sure I need not desire you not to
communicate to this fervent young Lady the liberties I
take with her character. 
I dare say, my Cousin could not approve of Miss
Howe's behaviour to this gentleman: A behaviour
which is talked of by as many as know Mr. Hickman
and her. Can a wise young Lady be easy under such
censure? She must know it. 
Mr. Hickman is really a very worthy man. Everybody
speaks well of him. But he is gentle-dispositioned,
and he adores Miss Howe; and Love admits not of an
air of even due dignity to the object of it. Yet will Mr.
Hickman hardly ever get back the reins he has yielded
up; unless she, by carrying too far the power of which
she seems at present too sensible, should, when she has
no favours to confer which he has not a right to demand,
provoke him to throw off the too heavy yoke. 
And should he do so, and then treat her with negligence,
Miss Howe, of all the women I know, will be
the least able to support herself under it. She will then
be more unhappy than she ever made him: For a man
who is uneasy at home can divert himself abroad; which
a woman cannot so easily do, without scandal. 
Permit me to take further notice, as to Miss Howe; 
that it is very obvious to me, that she has, by her haughty
behaviour to this worthy man, involved herself in one
difficulty, from which she knows not how to extricate
herself with that grace, which accompanies all her actions. 
She intends to have Mr. Hickman. I believe
she does not dislike him. And it will cost her no small
pains to descend from the elevation she has climbed to. 
Another inconvenience she will suffer from her having
taught every-body (for she is above disguise) to think,
by her treatment of Mr. Hickman, much more meanly
of him than he deserves to be thought of. And must she
not suffer dishonour in his dishonour? 

Mrs. Howe is much disturbed at her Daughter's behaviour
to the gentleman. He is very deservedly a favourite
of hers. But [another failing in Miss Howe]
her Mother has not all the authority with her that &dotup;a
Mother ought to have. Miss Howe is indeed a woman
of fine sense; but it requires a high degree of
good understanding, as well as a sweet and gentle disposition
of mind, and great discretion, in a child,
when grown up, to let it be seen, that she mingles
Reverence with her Love, to a Parent, who has talents
visibly inferior to her own.&dotup; 
Miss Howe is open, generous, noble. The Mother
has not any of her fine qualities. Parents, in order to
preserve their childrens veneration for them, should take
great care not to let them see any-thing in their conduct,
or behaviour, or principles, which they themselves would
not approve of in others. 
&dotup;Mr. Hickman has, however, this consideration to
comfort himself with; that the same vivacity by
which he suffers, makes Miss Howe's own Mother, at
times, equally sensible. And as he sees enough of this
beforehand, he will have more reason to blame himself
than the Lady, should she prove as lively a Wife,
as she was a Mistress, for having continued his addresses,
and married her, against such threatening appearances. 
&dotup;There is also another circumstance which good-natured
men who engage with even lively women,
may look forward to with pleasure; a circumstance
which generally lowers the spirits of the Ladies, and
domesticates them, as I may call it: And which, as it
will bring those of Mr. Hickman and Miss Howe
nearer to a par, that worthy gentleman will have
double reason, when it happens, to congratulate himself
upon it.&dotup; 
But, after all, I see that there is something so charmingly
brilliant and frank in Miss Howe's disposition, altho'
at present visibly overclouded by grief, that it is impossible 

not to love her, even for her failings. She
may, and I hope she will, make Mr. Hickman an
obliging wife. And if she do, she will have an additional
merit with me; since she cannot be apprehensive
of check or controul; and may therefore by her generosity
and prudence lay an obligation upon her husband,
by the performance of what is no more than her duty. 
Her Mother both loves and fears her. Yet is Mrs.
Howe also a woman of vivacity, and ready enough, I
dare say, to cry out where she is pained. But, alas!
she has, as I hinted above, weakened her authority by
the narrowness of her mind. 
Yet once she praised her Daughter to me with so
much warmth for the generosity of her spirit, that had
I not known the old Lady's character, I should have
thought her generous herself. And yet I have always
observed, that people even of narrow tempers are
ready to praise generous ones: —And thus have I accounted
for it; That such persons generally find it to
their purpose, that all the world should be open-minded
but themselves. 
The old Lady applied herself to me, to urge to the
young one the contents of the Will, in order to hasten
her to six a day for her marriage: But desired that I
would not let Miss Howe know that she did. 
I took the liberty upon it to tell Miss Howe, that I
hoped that her part of a Will, so soon, and so punctually,
in almost all its other articles, fulfilled, would
not be the only one that would be slighted. 
Her answer was, She would consider of it: And
made me a courtesy with such an air, as shewed me,
that she thought me more out of my sphere, than I
could allow her to think me, had I been permitted to
argue the point with her. 
I found Miss Howe and her own servant-maid in
deep mourning. This, it seems, had occasioned a
great debate at first between her Mother and her. Her
Mother had the words of the Will on her side; and 

Mr. Hickman's interest in her view; her Daughter
having said, that she would wear it for Six months at
least. But the young Lady carried her point—‘Strange,
said she, if I, who shall mourn the heavy, the irreparable
loss to the last hour of my life, should not
shew my concern to the world for a few months!’ 
Mr. Hickman, for his part, was so far from uttering
an opposing word on this occasion, that, on the
very day that Miss Howe put on hers, he waited on
her in a new suit of mourning, as for a near relation. 
His servants and equipage made the same respectful appearance. 
Whether the Mother was consulted by him in it, I
cannot say; but the Daughter knew nothing of it, till
she saw him in it. She looked at him with surprize,
and asked him, For whom he mourned? 
The dear, and ever-dear Miss Harlowe, he said. 
She was at a loss, it seems—At last—All the world
ought to mourn for my Clarissa, said she; but whom,
Man, [that was her whimsical address to him] thinkest
thou to oblige by this appearance? 
It is more than appearance, Madam. I love not
my own Sister, worthy as she is, better than I loved
Miss Clarissa Harlowe. I oblige myself by it. And if
I disoblige not you, that is all I wish. 
She surveyed him, I am told, from head to foot. 
She knew not, at first, whether to be angry or pleased. 
—At length, I thought at first, said she, that you
might have a bolder and freer motive—‘But’ (as my
Mamma says) ‘you may be a well-meaning man, tho'
generally a little wrong-headed—However, as the
world is censorious, and may think us nearer of kin
than I would have it supposed, I must take care, that
I am not seen abroad in your company.’ 
But let me add, Mr. Belford, that if this compliment
of Mr. Hickman (or this more than compliment,
as I may well call it, since the worthy man
speaks not of my dear Cousin without emotion) does 

not produce a short day, I shall think Miss Howe has
less generosity in her temper than I am willing to allow
her. 
You will excuse me, Mr. Belford, for the particularities
which you invited and encouraged. 
Having now seen every-thing that relates to the
Will of my dear Cousin brought to a desirable issue; 
I will set about making my own. I shall follow the
dear creature's example, and give my reasons for every
article, that there may be no room for after-contention. 
What but a fear of death, a fear unworthy of a
creature who knows that he must one day as surely
die as he was born, can hinder any one from making
such a disposition? 
I hope soon to pay my respects to you in town. 
Mean time, I am, with great respect, dear Sir, 
Your faithful and affectionate humble Servant,
Wm. Morden. 