



Dear Mother,
Well, I can't find my Letter, and so I'll tell
you all, as briefly as I can. All went well
enough in the main for some time after my last Letter
but one. At last, I saw some Reason to suspect; 
for he would look upon me, whenever he saw me,
in such a manner, as shew'd not well; and at last
he came to me, as I was in the Summer-house in
the little Garden, at work with my Needle, and
Mrs. Jervis was just gone from me; and I would
have gone out; but he said, No, don't go, Pamela;
I have something to say to you; and you always fly
me so, whenever I come near you, as if you was
afraid of me. 
I was all confounded; and said at last; It does
not become your poor Servant to stay in your Presence, 

Sir, without your Business requir'd it; and I
hope I shall always know my Place. 
Well, says he, my Business does require it sometimes,
and I have a mind you should stay to hear
what I have to say to you. 
I stood all confounded, and began to tremble,
and the more when he took me by the Hand; for
now no Soul was near us. 
My Sister Davers, said he, (and seem'd, I thought,
to be as much at a Loss for Words as I) would
have had you live with her; but she would not do
for you what I am resolv'd to do, if you continue
faithful and obliging. What say'st thou, my Girl,
said he, with some Eagerness, hadst thou not rather
stay with me than go to my Sister Davers? He
look'd so, as fill'd me with Affrightment; I don't know
how; wildly I thought. 
I said, when I could speak, Your Honour will
forgive your poor Servant; but as you have no
Lady for me to wait upon, and my good Lady has
been now dead this Twelve-month, I had rather,
if it would not displease you, wait upon Lady Davers,
because— 
I was proceeding; and he said a little hastily— 
Because you're a little Fool, and know not what's
good for yourself. I tell you, I will make a Gentlewoman
of you, if you be obliging, and don't stand
in your own Light; and so saying, he put his Arm
about me, and kiss'd me! 
Now you will say, all his Wickedness appear'd
plainly. I struggled, and trembled, and was so benumb'd
with Terror, that I sunk down, not in a
Fit, and yet not myself; and I found myself in his
Arms, quite void of Strength, and he kissed me two
or three times, as if he would have eaten me. —At
last I burst from him, and was getting out of the Summer-house; 
but he held me back, and shut the Door. 

I would have given my Life for a Farthing. And
he said, I'll do you no Harm, Pamela; don't be
afraid of me. I said, I won't stay! You won't, Hussy,
said he! Do you know who you speak to! I lost all
Fear, and all Respect, and said, Yes, I do, Sir, too
well! —Well may I forget that I am your Servant,
when you forget what belongs to a Master. 
I sobb'd and cry'd most sadly. What a foolish
Hussy you are, said he, have I done you any Harm? — 
Yes, Sir, said I, the greatest Harm in the World: You have taught me to forget myself, and what belongs
to me, and have lessen'd the Distance that
Fortune has made between us, by demeaning yourself,
to be so free to a poor Servant. Yet, Sir, said I,
I will be so bold to say, I am honest, tho' poor; 
And if you was a Prince, I would not be otherwise. 
He was angry, and said, Who would have you
otherwise, you foolish Slut! Ceafe your blubbering! 
I own I have demean'd myself; but it was only to
try you: If you can keep this Matter secret, you'll
give me the better Opinion of your Prudence; and
here's something, said he, putting some Gold in my
Hand, to make you Amends for the Fright I put
you to. Go, take a Walk in the Garden, and don't
go in till your blubbering is over: And I charge you
say nothing of what has past, and all shall be well,
and I'll forgive you. 
I won't take the Money, indeed, Sir, said I; poor
as I am! I won't take it: for to say Truth, I thought
it look'd like taking Earnest; and so I put it upon
the Bench; and as he seem'd vex'd and confus'd at
what he had done, I took the Opportunity to open
the Door, and went out of the Summer-house. 
He called to me, and said, Be secret, I charge you,
Pamela; and don't go in yet, as I told you. 
O how poor and mean must these Actions be,
and how little must they make the best of Gentlemen 

look, when they offer such things as are unworthy
of themselves, and put it into the Power of
their Inferiors to be greater than they! 
I took a Turn or two in the Garden, but in Sight
of the House for fear of the worst, and breathed
upon my Hand to dry my Eyes, because I would
not be too disobedient. My next shall tell you more. 
Pray for me, my dear Father and Mother; and
don't be angry I have not yet run away from this
House, so late my Comfort and Delight, but now
my Anguish and Terror. I am forc'd to break off,
hastily, 
Your dutiful and honest Daughter. 

