


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Selby-house, Friday, Aug. 11.
Tell you, my dear Lady G. all I think of the
contents of the pacquet you so kindly sent me by
an express messenger! —What will you say to me, if I
do? I can much better tell you, what all my friends here
say of them. They are for congratulating me upon
those contents. But can I congratulate myself? Can I
receive their congratulations? —A woman! an angel! 
—So much more worthy of Sir Charles Grandison,
than the poor Harriet Byron can be! —O how great is
Clementina, how little am I, in my own eyes! The
Lady will still be his. She must. She shall. She will
change her mind. So earnest he! So fervently in love
with him, she! Who will presume to hope a place
in his affections after her? My pride, my dear, is all
up! Can I? How mean will any one now appear in
his eyes, when he thinks of his Clementina? And
who can be contented with half a heart? Nay, not
half a one, if he does justice to this wonder of a woman? 
It was always my consolation, when I looked
upon him as lost to myself, that it was to a person of
superior merit. 
But who can forbear pitying the glorious man! O
my dear, I am lost in the subject! I know not what
to say. Were I to tell you what I thought, what
were my emotions, as I read now his generous pity
for the Count of Belvedere—Now his affectionate and 

respectful address to the noble Lady—Her agitations of
mind, previous to the delivery of her paper to him— 
That paper, the contents so greatly surpassing all that
I had read of woman! Yet so much of a piece with
the conduct she shewed, when the struggle between
her Religion and her Love cost her her reason. His
delicacy, yet equal steadiness, in his religion—In short,
the whole of his conduct and hers, in the various lights
in which they appeared in the different conversations
with her, with her family—Were I to tell you, I say,
what I thought, and what were my emotions, as I
read, a volume would not be sufficient; nor know I
what measure would contain my tears. Suffice it to
say, that I was not able to rise in two days and
nights; and it has been with the greatest difficulty,
that I obtained pen and ink, and leave to write; and
the physician talks of confining me to my chamber for
a week to come. 
Sir Charles cries out upon suspense. Indeed it is a
grievous thing. 
You will observe, that in these last Letters he mentions
me but once; and that is, in making me a compliment
on the favour which the beloved Four conferred
upon me, and all of us, in the visit you were so
good as to make us. And why do you think I take
notice of this? —Not from petulance, I assure you:
But for the praise of his justice as well as delicacy. 
For could Sir Charles Grandison excusably (if, on other
occasions he remembred the poor girl whom he rescued; 
could he excusably, I say) while his soul was agitated
by his own suspense, occasioned by the uncommon
greatness of Clementina's behaviour, think of any other
woman in the world? 
But you see, my Charlotte, that the excellent man
has been, perhaps is, greatly indisposed. Can we wonder
at it? Such a prize in view, so many difficulties
overcome, as he had to struggle with; yet, at last, a
seemingly insuperable one arising from the Lady herself, 

and from motives that increased his admiration
of her? But a woman may be eloquent, from grief
and disappointment; when a man, though his nobler
heart is torn in pieces, must hardly complain! —How
do I pity the distresses of a manly heart! 
But should this noble Lady, on his return to Bologna,
after a month's absence, hold her purpose, unless he
changes his religion, I will tell you my thoughts of what
will probably be the result. He will not marry at all. 
If he cannot love another woman, as well as he does
Clementina, ought he? And who can equally deserve
his Love? Have we not heard from himself, as well as
from Dr. Bartlett, that all the troubles he has had,
have proceeded from our Sex? It is true, that men
and women can hardly ever have any great troubles,
but what must arise from each other. And his have
arisen from good women too (I hope Lady Olivia is
not deliberately bad). And why should so good a man
continue to make himself subject to the petulance, to
the foibles, of us wayward women, who hardly know
our own minds, as Signor Jeronymo told his friend,
when our wishes are in our power? 
But, sick or well, you see Sir Charles Grandison
loses not his spirit. His enlarged heart can rejoice in
the happiness of his friends. I will have joy, said
he once to me. And must he not have it in the
hopes of recovery of his friend Jeronymo? In the restoration
of the admirable Clementina? And in the
happiness those recoveries must give to a worthy and
illustrious family? Let me enumerate, from him, the
pleasure he enjoys, in the felicity he has given to many; 
tho' he cannot be, in himself, the happy person
he makes others. Is he not delighted with the happiness
of Lord and Lady W.? Of his Beauchamp,
and his Beauchamp's father and mother? —Of Lady
Mansfield, and her family? With yours and Lord
G's happiness? Does it not rejoice you, my dear,
to have it in your power to contribute to the pleasure 

of such a brother? And how great, how honourable,
how considerate, how delicate, is his behaviour
to the noble Clementina; how patient, how disinterested,
with her family! How ready to enter into their
sentiments, and to allow for them, tho' against himself! 
But he is prudent: He sees before him at a
great distance: He is resolved to have nothing to reproach
himself with, in future, that he can obviate at
present. But is not his conduct such, as would make
a considerate person, who has any connexions with
him, tremble? Since if there be a fault between them,
it must be all that person's; and he will not, if it be
possible for him to avoid it, be a sharer in it? Do
you think, my dear, that had he been the first man,
he would have been so complaisant to his Eve as Milton
makes Adam [So contrary to that part of his character,
which made him accuse the woman to the Almighty (a) ]—To taste the forbidden fruit, because he
would not be separated from her, in her punishment,
tho' all posterity were to suffer by it? —No; it is my
opinion, that your brother would have had gallantry
enough to his fallen spouse, to have made him extremely
regret her lapse; but that he would have done
his own duty, were it but for the sake of posterity, and
left it to the Almighty, if such had been his pleasure,
to have annihilated his first Eve, and given him a second
—But, my dear, do I not write strangely? I
would be chearful, if I could, because you are so kind
as to take pains to make me so. But on re-perusing
what I have written, I am afraid that you have taught
me to think oddly. Tell me truth, Charlotte: Is not
what has last slipt from my pen, more in Lady G's
manner, than in that of 
Her Harriet Byron? 
One line more; and no more, my dear, my indulgent
aunt Selby! —They won't let me write 

on, Charlotte, when I had a thousand things further
to say, on the contents of this important pacquet; 
or I should not have concluded so uncharacteristically. 

