


In which the knight resumes his importance. 
Doctor Fillet having borrowed
a couple of sheets from the landlady,
dressed the misanthrope and Tom
Clarke in ghostly apparel, which was
re-inforced by a few drops of liquid
phosphorus, from Ferret's phial, rubbed
on the fore-heads of the two adventurers. 
Thus equipped they returned
to the church with their conductor,
who entered with them softly
at an aile which was opposite to a
place where the novice kept watch. 
They stole unperceived through the
body of the church; and though it
was so dark that they could not distinguish
the captain with the eye, they
heard the sound of his steps, as he
walked backwards and forwards on
the pavement with uncommon expedition,
and an ejaculation now and
then escape in murmur from his
lips. 

The triumvirate having taken their
station, with a large pew in their front,
the two ghosts uncovered their heads,
which, by help of the phosphorus, exhibited
a pale and lambent flame, extremely
dismal and ghastly to the
view; then Ferret, in a squeaking tone
exclaimed, “Samuel Crowe! Samuel
Crowe!” The captain hearing himself
accosted in this manner, at such a
time, and in such a place, replied,
“Hilloah;” and turning his eyes towards
the quarter whence the voice
seemed to proceed, beheld the terrible
apparition. This no sooner saluted
his view, than his hair bristled up, his
knees began to knock, and his teeth to
chatter, while he cried aloud, “In the
name of God, where are you bound,
ho?” To this hail, the misanthrope
answered, “We are the spirits of
thy grandmother Jane and thy aunt
Bridget.” 
At mention of these names, Crowe's
terrors began to give way to his resentment,
and he pronounced in a quick
tone of surprize, mixed with indignation, 

“What d'ye want? what d'ye
want? what d'ye want, ho?” The
spirit replied, “We are sent to warn
thee of thy fate.” “From whence,
ho?” cried the captain, whose choler
had by this time well nigh triumphed
over his fear. “From heaven,” said
the voice. “Ye lie, ye b&wblank;s of hell!
(did our novice exclaim) ye are damned
for heaving me out of my right,
five fathom and a half by the lead, in
burning brimstone. Don't I see the
blue flames come out of your hawse-holes
—mayhap you may be the devil
himself for aught I know—but, I
trust in the Lord, d'ye see—I never
disrated a kinsman, d'ye see; so don't
come along side of me—put about on
th'other tack, d'ye see—you need not
clap hard aweather, for you'll soon
get to hell again with a flowing sail.” 
So saying, he had recourse to his
Pater-noster; but, perceiving the apparitions
approach, he thundered out,
“Avast,—avast—sheer off, ye babes
of hell, or I'll be foul of your forelights.” 
He accordingly sprung forwards 

with his hanger, and very probably
would have set the spirits on
their way to the other world, had not
he fallen over a pew in the dark, and
intangled himself so much among the
benches, that he could not immediately
recover his footing. The
triumvirate took this opportunity to
retire; and such was the precipitation
of Ferret in his retreat, that he encountered
a post, by which his right
eye sustained considerable damage: a
circumstance which induced him to
inveigh bitterly against his own folly,
as well as the impertinence of his
companions, who had inveigled him
into such a troublesome adventure. 
Neither he nor Clarke could be prevailed
upon to revisit the novice. The
doctor himself thought his disease was
desperate; and, mounting his horse,
returned to his own habitation. 
Ferret, finding all the beds in the
public house were occupied, composed
himself to sleep in a windsor-chair at
the chimney-corner; and Mr. Clarke,
whose disposition was extremely amorous, 

resolved to renew his practices on
the heart of Dolly. He had reconnoitred
the apartments in which the bodies of
the knight and his squire were deposited,
and discovered close by the top
of the stair-case a sort of a closet or
hovel just large enough to contain a
truckle-bed, which, from some other
particulars, he supposed to be the bed-chamber
of his beloved Dolly, who
had by this time retired to her repose. 
Full of this idea, and instigated by
the dæmon of desire, Mr. Thomas
crept softly up stairs; and lifting the
latch of the closet-door, his heart began
to palpitate with joyous expectation:
but before he could breathe the
gentle effusions of his love, the supposed
damsel started up, and seizing
him by the collar with an Herculean
gripe, uttered, in the voice of Crabshaw,
“It wa'n't for nothing that I
dreamed of Newgate, sirrah; but
I'd have thee to know, an arrant
squire is not to be robbed by such a
peddling thief as thee—here I'll howld
thee vast, and the devil were in thy 

doublet—help! murder! vire!
help!” 
It was impossible for Mr. Clarke to
disengage himself, and equally impracticable
to speak in his own vindication; 
so that here he stood trembling
and half throttled, until the
whole house being alarmed, the landlady
and her ostler ran up stairs with
a candle. When the light rendered
objects visible, an equal astonishment
prevailed on all sides: Crabshaw was
confounded at sight of Mr. Clarke,
whose person he well knew; and releasing
him instantly from his grasp,
“Bodikins! (cried he) I believe as
how this hawse is haunted—who
thought to meet with Measter Laayer
Clarke at midnight, and so far from
hoam.” The landlady could not
comprehend the meaning of this encounter; 
nor could Tom conceive
how Crabshaw had transported himself
hither from the room below, in
which he saw him quietly reposed. 
Yet nothing was more easy than to
explain this mystery: the apartment 

below was the chamber which the
hostess and her daughter reserved for
their own convenience; and this
particular having been intimated to
the squire while he was at supper, he
had resigned the bed quietly, and been
conducted hither in the absence of
the company. Tom, recollecting
himself as well as he could, professed
himself of Crabshaw's opinion,
that the house was haunted,
declaring that he could not well account
for his being there in the dark; 
and leaving those that were assembled
to discuss this knotty point, retired
down stairs, in hope of meeting
with his charmer, whom accordingly
he found in the kitchen just risen,
and wrapped in a loose dishabille. 
The noise of Crabshaw's cries had
awakened and aroused his master,
who, rising suddenly in the dark,
snatched up his sword that lay by
his bed-side, and hastened to the
scene of tumult, where all their
mouths were opened at once, to explain
the cause of the disturbance, 

and make an apology for breaking
his honour's rest. He said nothing; 
but taking the candle in his hand,
beckoned to his squire to follow him
into his apartment, resolving to arm
and take horse immediately. Crabshaw
understood his meaning; and
while he shuffled on his cloaths,
yawning hideously all the while,
wished the lawyer at the devil for
having visited him so unseasonably; 
and even cursed himself for the noise
he had made, in consequence of which
he foresaw he should now be obliged
to forfeit his night's rest, and travel
in the dark, exposed to the inclemencies
of the weather. “Pox rot thee,
Tom Clarke, for a wicked laayer!
(said he to himself) hadst thou been
hanged at Bartlemey-tide, I should
this night have slept in peace, that I
should—an I would there was a
blister on this plaguy tongue of mine
for making such a hollowballoo; that
I do—five gallons of cold water has
my poor belly been drenched with
since night fell; so as my reins and 

my liver are all one as if they were
turned into ice, and my whole harslet
shakes and shivers like a vial of
quick-silver. I have been dragged,
half drowned like a rotten ewe, from
the bottom of a river; and who
knows but I may be next dragged
quite dead from the bottom of a
coal-pit—if so be as I am, I shall
go to hell to be sure, for being consarned
like in my own moorder; 
that I will: so I will: for a plague
on it, I had no business with the vagaries
of this crazy-peated measter
of mine, a pox on him, say I.” 
He had just finished this soliloquy
as he entered the apartment of his
master, who desired to know what
was become of his armour. Timothy,
understanding that it had been
left in the room when the knight
undressed, began to scratch his head
in great perplexity; and at last declared
it as his opinion that it must
have been carried off by witchcraft. 
Then he related his adventure with
Tom Clarke, who he said was conveyed 

to his bedside he knew not
how; and concluded, with affirming
they were no better than Papishes,
who did not believe in witchcraft. 
Sir Launcelot could not help
smiling at his simplicity; but assuming
a peremptory air, he commanded
him to fetch the armour without delay,
that he might afterwards saddle
the horses, in order to prosecute their
journey. Timothy retired in great
tribulation to the kitchen, where
finding the misanthrope, whom the
noise had also disturbed, and still impressed
with the notion of his being
a conjurer, he offered him a shilling
if he would cast a figure, and let him
know what was become of his master's
armour. 
Ferret, in hope of producing more
mischief, informed him without hesitation,
that one of the company had
conveyed it into the chancel of the
church, where he would now find
it, deposited; at the same time presenting
him with the key, which 

Mr. Fillet had left in his custody. 
The squire, who was none of those
who set hobgoblins at defiance, being
afraid to enter the church alone
at these hours, bargained with the
ostler to accompany and light him
with a lanthorn. Thus attended, he
advanced to the place, where the
armour lay in a heap, and loaded it
upon the back of his attendant without
molestation, the launce being
shouldered over the whole. In
this equipage they were just going
to retire, when the ostler hearing a
noise at some distance, wheeled about
with such velocity, that one
end of the spear saluting Crabshaw's
pate, the poor squire measured his
length on the ground; and crushing
the lanthorn in his fall, the light was
extinguished. The other, terrified
at these effects of his own sudden
motion, threw down his burthen,
and would have betaken himself to
flight, had not Crabshaw laid fast
hold on his leg, that he himself
might not be deserted. The sound 

of the pieces clattering on the pavement,
roused captain Crowe from a
trance or slumber in which he had
lain since the apparition vanished; 
and he hollowed, or rather bellowed,
with vast vociferation. Timothy
and his friend were so intimidated
by this terrific strain, that
they thought no more of the armour,
but ran home arm in arm,
and appeared in the kitchen with
all the marks of horror and consternation. 
When Sir Launcelot came forth
wrapped in his cloak, and demanded
his arms, Crabshaw declared that
the devil had them in possession; 
and this assertion was confirmed by
the ostler, who pretended to know
the devil by his roar. Ferret sat in
his corner, maintaining the most
mortifying silence, and enjoying the
impatience of the knight, who in
vain requested an explanation of this
mystery. At length his eyes began
to lighten, when seizing Crabshaw
in one hand, and the ostler in the 

other, he swore by heaven he would
dash their souls out, and raze the
house to the foundation, if they did
not instantly disclose the particulars
of this transaction. The good woman
fell on her knees, protesting, in
the name of the Lord, that she was
innocent as the child unborn, thof
she had lent the captain a Prayer
Book to learn the Lord's Prayer, a
lanthorn and candle to light him to
the church, and a couple of clean
sheets for the use of the other gentlemen. 
The knight was more and
more puzzled by this declaration; 
when Mr. Clarke, coming into the
kitchen, presented himself with a
low obeisance to his old patron. 
Sir Launcelot's anger was immediately
converted into surprize. He
set at liberty the squire and the
ostler; and stretching out his hand
to the lawyer, “My good friend
Clarke, (said he) how came you
hither? Can you solve this knotty
point which hath involved us all in
such confusion?” 

Tom forthwith began a very circumstantial
recapitulation of what
had happened to his uncle; in what
manner he had been disappointed
of the estate; how he had accidentally
seen his honour, been enamoured
of his character, and become
ambitious of following his example. 
Then he related the particulars
of the plan which had been
laid down to divert him from his
design, and concluded with assuring
the knight, that the captain was a
very honest man, though he seemed
to be a little disordered in his intellects. 
“I believe it, (replied Sir
Launcelot): madness and honesty are
not incompatible—indeed I feel it by
experience.” 
Tom proceeded to ask pardon, in
his uncle's name, for his having
made so free with the knight's armour; 
and begged his honour, for
the love of God, would use his authority
with Crowe that he might quit
all thoughts of knight-errantry, for
which he was by no means qualified; 

for being totally ignorant of
the laws of the land, he would be
continually committing trespasses, and
bring himself into trouble. He
said in case he should prove refractory,
he might be apprehended by
virtue of a friendly warrant, for
having feloniously carried off the
knight's accoutrements. “Taking
away another man's moveables, (said
he) and personal goods against the
will of the owner, is furtum and felony
according to the statute: different
indeed from robbery, which
implies putting in fear on the king's
highway, in alta via regia violenter,
& felonice captum & asportatum in
magnum terrorem, &c. for if the robbery
be laid in the indictment as done
in quadam via pedestri, in a foot-path,
the offender will not be ousted of
his clergy. It must be in alta via
regia; and your honour will please
to take notice, that robberies committed
on the river Thames, are adjudged
as done in alta via regia; for 

the king's highstream is all the same
as the king's highway.” 
Sir Launcelot could not help smiling
at Tom's learned investigation. 
He congratulated him on the progress
he had made in the study of
the law. He expressed his concern
at the strange turn the captain had
taken; and promised to use his influence
in persuading him to desist
from the preposterous design he had
formed. The lawyer thus assured,
repaired immediately to the church,
accompanied by the squire, and held
a parley with his uncle, who, when
he understood that the knight in person
desired a conference, surrendered
up the arms quietly, and returned
to the publick-house. Sir Launcelot
received the honest seaman with
his usual complacency; and perceiving
great discomposure in his looks,
said, he was sorry to hear he had
passed such a disagreeable night to so
little purpose. Crowe, having recruited
his spirits with a bumper of
brandy, thanked him for his concern, 

and observed that he had passed
many a hard night in his time; 
but such another as this, he would
not be bound to weather for the
command of the whole British navy. 
“I have seen Davy Jones in the
shape of a blue flame, d'ye see, hoping
to and fro, on the spritsail yard
arm; and I've seen your Jacks o'the
Lanthorn, and Wills o'the Wisp,
and many such spirits, both by sea
and land: but, to-night I've been
boarded by all the devils and damn'd
souls in hell, squeaking and squalling,
and glimmering and glaring. 
Bounce, went the door—crack, went
the pew—crash, came the tackle— 
white-sheeted ghosts dancing in one
corner by the glow-worm's light— 
black devils hobbling in another— 
Lord, have mercy upon us! and I
was hailed, Tom, I was, by my
grand-mother Jane, and my aunt
Bridget, d'ye see—a couple of damn'd
—but they're roasting; that's one
comfort, my lad.” 

When he had thus disburthened
his conscience, Sir Launcelot introduced
the subject of the new occupation
at which he aspired. “I
understand, said he, that you are
desirous of treading the paths of errantry,
which I assure you, are thorny
and troublesome. Nevertheless,
as your purpose is to exercise your
humanity and benevolence, so your
ambition is commendable. But towards
the practice of chivalry, there
is something more required than
the virtues of courage and generosity. 
A knight-errant ought to understand
the sciences, to be master of
ethics or morality, to be well versed
in theology, a complete casuist, and
minutely acquainted with the laws
of his country. He should not only
be patient of cold, hunger, and fatigue,
righteous, just, and valiant; 
but also chaste, religious, temperate,
polite, and conversable; and
have all his passions under the rein,
except love, whose empire he should
submissively acknowledge. He said, 

this was the very essence of chivalry,
and no man had ever made such a
profession of arms, without having
first placed his affection upon some
beauteous object, for whose honour,
and at whose command, he would
chearfully encounter the most dreadful
perils. 
He took notice that nothing could
be more irregular than the manner
in which Crowe had attempted to
keep his vigil: for he had never
served his noviciate—he had not
prepared himself with abstinence and
prayer—he had not provided a qualified
godfather for the ceremony of
dubbing—he had no armour of his
own to wake; but, on the very threshold
of chivalry, which is the perfection
of justice, had unjustly purloined
the arms of another knight:
that this was a meer mockery of a
religious institution; and therefore
unpleasing in the sight of heaven; 
witness, the demons and hobgoblins
that were permitted to disturb and
torment him in his trial. 

Crowe having listened to these remarks,
with earnest attention, replied,
after some hesitation: “I am
bound to you, brother, for your kind
and christian counsel—I doubt as
how I've steered by a wrong chart,
d'ye see—as for the matter of the
sciences, to be sure, I know plain
sailing and mercator; and am an indifferent
good seamen, thof I say it
that should not say it: but as to all
the rest, no better than the viol
block or the geer captain. Religion
I han't much over-hauled; and we
tars laugh at your polite conversation,
thof, mayhap, we can chaunt
a few ballads to keep the hands
awake in the night watch; then for
chastity, brother, I doubt that's not
to be expected in a sailor just come
a-shore, after a long voyage—sure
all those poor hearts won't be damned
for steering in the wake of nature. 
As for a sweet-heart, Bet
Mizen of St. Catherine's would fit
me to a hair—she and I are old
messmates; and—what signifies talking, 

brother, she knows already the
trim of my vessel, d'ye see.” He
concluded with saying, “He thought
he wa'n't too old to learn; and if Sir
Launcelot would take him in tow,
as his tender, he would stand by him
all weathers, and it should not cost
his consort a farthing's expence.” 
The knight said, he did not think
himself of consequence enough to
have such a pupil; but should always
be ready to give him his best
advice, as a specimen of which he
exhorted him to weigh all the circumstances,
and deliberate calmly
and leisurely, before he actually engaged
in such a boisterous profession,
assuring him that if, at the end of
three months, his resolution should
continue, he would take upon himself
the office of his instructor. In
the mean time, he gratified the hostess
for his lodging, put on his armour,
took leave of the company,
and mounting Bronzomarte, proceeded
southerly, being attended by his 

squire Crabshaw, grumbling on the
back of Gilbert. 