


MY DEAR LETTY,
THIS method of writing to you from time to
time, without any hopes of an answer, affords me,
I own, some ease and satisfaction in the midst of 

my dispuiet, as it in some degree lightens the
burden of affliction; but it is at best a very
imperfect enjoyment of friendship, because it admits
of no return of confidence and good
counsel —I would give the whole world to have
your company for a single day —I am heartily
tired of this itinerant way of life —I am quite dizzy
with a perpetual succession of objects —Besides
it is impossible to travel such a length of way,
without being exposed to inconveniences, dangers,
and disagreeable accidents, which prove very grievous
to a poor creature of weak nerves like me, and
make me pay very dear for the gratification of my
curiosity. 
Nature never intended me for the busy world 
—I long for repose and solitude, where I can enjoy
that disinterested friendship which is not to be
found among crowds, and indulge those pleasing
reveries that shun the hurry and tumult of fashionable
society —Unexperienced as I am in the
commerce of life, I have seen enough to give me
a disgust to the generality of those who carry it on 
—There is such malice, treachery, and dissimulation,
even among professed friends and intimate
companions, as cannot fail to strike a virtuous
mind with horror; and when Vice quits the stage
for a moment, her place is immediately occupied
by Folly; which is often too serious to excite any
thing but compassion —Perhaps I ought to be silent
on the foibles of my poor aunt; but with you, my
dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her
weaknesses are such as cannot be concealed. Since
the first moment we arrived at Bath, she has been
employed constantly in spreading nets for the other
sex; and at length, she has caught a superannuated
lieutenant, who is in a fair way to make
her change her name —My uncle and my brother 

seem to have no objection to this extraordinary
match, which, I make no doubt, will afford
abundance of matter of conversation and mirth; 
for my part, I am too sensible of my own weaknesses,
to be diverted with those of other people 
—At present, I have something at heart that
employs my whole attention, and keeps my mind
in the utmost terror and suspense. 
Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my
brother at the parlour window of an inn, where
we had lodged, a person passed a-horseback, whom
(gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered to be
Wilson! He wore a white riding-coat, with the
cape buttoned up to his chin; looked remarkably
pale, and passed at a round trot, without seeming
to observe us —Indeed, he could not see us; for
there was a blind that concealed us from the view. 
You may guess how I was affected at this apparition 
—The light forsook my eyes; and I was seized
with such a palpitation and trembling, that I
could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and
strove to compose myself, that my brother might
not perceive my agitation; but it was impossible
to escape his prying eyes —He had observed the
object that alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew
him at the first glance —He now looked at me with
a stern countenance; then he ran out into the
street, to see what road the unfortunate horseman
had taken —He afterwards dispatched his man for
further intelligence, and seemed to meditate some
violent design. My uncle, being out of order,
we remained another night at the inn; and all
day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable
spy upon my conduct —He watched my very
looks with such eagerness of attention, as if he
would have penetrated into the utmost recesses of
my heart —This may be owing to his regard for 

my honour, if it is not the effect of his own pride; 
but he is so hot, and violent, and unrelenting,
that the sight of him alone throws me into a flutter; 
and really it will not be in my power to afford
him any share of my affection, if he persists
in persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he has
formed some scheme of vengeance, which will
make me completely wretched! I am afraid he
suspects some collusion from this appearance of
Wilson —Good God! did he really appear? or
was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to apprise
me of his death? 
O Letty, what shall I do?—where shall I turn
for advice and consolation?—shall I implore the
protection of my uncle, who has been always kind
and compassionate? —This must be my last resource. 
—I dread the thoughts of making him uneasy; 
and would rather suffer a thousand deaths
than live the cause of dissension in the family. — 
I cannot perceive the meaning of Wilson's coming
hither:—perhaps, he was in quest of us, in order
to disclose his real name and situation:—but
wherefore pass without staying to make the least
inquiry? —My dear Willis, I am lost in conjecture 
—I have not closed an eye since I saw him. —All
night long have I been tossed about from one imagination
to another. —The reflection finds no resting
place. —I have prayed, and sighed, and wept
plentifully. —If this terrible suspense continues
much longer, I shall have another fit of illness,
and then the whole family will be in confusion. — 
If it was consistent with the wise purposes of Providence,
would I were in my grave. —But it is my
duty to be resigned. —My dearest Letty, excuse
my weakness—excuse these blots—my tears fall so
fast that I cannot keep the paper dry—yet I ought
to consider that I have as yet no cause to despair— 

but I am such a faint-hearted timorous creature! 
Thank God, my uncle is much better than he
was yesterday. —He is resolved to pursue our journey
strait to Wales. —I hope we shall take Gloucester
in our way—that hope chears my poor heart 
—I shall once more embrace my best beloved Willis,
and pour all my griefs into her friendly bosom. 
—O heaven! is it possible that such happiness
is reserved for 
The dejected and forlorn
Lydia Melford. 
Oct. 4. 