


CHAP. XXXIX.
He embarks for France; is overtaken by a
storm; is surprised with the appearance of
Pipes; lands at Calais, and has an affair with
the officers of the custom-house. p. 1
CHAP. XL.
He makes a fruitless attempt in gallantry; departs
for Boulogne, where he spends the evening with
certain English exiles. p. 11
CHAP. XLI.
Proceeds for the capital. Takes up his lodging at
Bernay, where he is overtaken by Mr. Hornbeck,
whose head he longs to fortify. p. 19
CHAP. XLII.
They set out in company, breakfast at Abbe Ville,
dine at Amiens, and about eleven o'clock arrive
at Chantilly, where Peregrine executes a plan
which he had concerted upon Hornbeck. p. 24

CHAP. XLIII.
He is involved in an adventure at Paris, and taken
prisoner by the city-guard. Becomes acquainted
with a French nobleman, who introduces him
into the beau monde. p. 29
CHAP. XLIV.
Acquires a distinct idea of the French government; 
quarrels with a mousquetaire, whom he afterwards
fights and vanquishes, after having punished
him for interfering in his amorous recreations. p. 39
CHAP. XLV.
Mr. Jolter threatens to leave him on account of his
misconduct, which he promises to rectify; but
his resolution is defeated by the impetuosity of his
passions. He meets accidentally with Mrs. Hornbeck,
who elopes with him from her husband,
but is restored by the interposition of the British
embassador. p. 49
CHAP. XLVI.
Peregrine resolves to return to England, is diverted
with the odd characters of two of his countrymen,
with whom he contracts an acquaintance in the
apartments of the Palais Royal. p. 58
CHAP. XLVII.
He introduces his new friends to Mr. Jolter, with
whom the doctor enters into a dispute upon government,
which had dwell nigh terminated in
open war. p. 68

CHAP. XLVIII.
The doctor prepares an entertainment in the manner
of the ancients, which is attended with diver
ridiculous circumstances. p. 75
CHAP. XLIX.
The Italian marquis and German baron are disgraced; 
the painter is persuaded to accompany
Pickle to a masquerade in woman's apparel; is
engaged in a troublesome adventure, and with
his companion conveyed to the Bastile. p. 88
CHAP. L.
By the fidelity of Pipes, Jolter is informed of his
pupil's fate. Confers with the physician. Applies
to the Embassador, who with great difficulty obtains
the discharge of the prisoners, on certain conditions. p. 97
CHAP. LI.
Peregrine makes himself merry at the expence of the
painter, who curses his landlady, and breaks with
the doctor. p. 102
CHAP. LII.
Pallet conceives an hearty contempt for his fellow-traveller,
and attaches himself to Pickle, who,
nevertheless, persecutes him with his mischievous
talent, upon the road to Flanders. p. 112

CHAP. LIII.
Nor is the physician sacred from his ridicule. They
reach Arras, where our adventurer engages in
play with two French officers, who next morning
give the landlord an interesting proof of their
importance. p. 121
CHAP. LIV.
Peregrine moralizes upon their behaviour, which is
condemned by the doctor, and defended by the governor. 
They arrive in safety at Lisle, dine at
an ordinary, visit the citadel. The physician
quarrels with a North-Briton, who is put in
arrest. p. 129
CHAP. LV.
Pickle engages with a knight of Malta, in a conversation
upon the English stage, which is followed
by a dissertation on the theatres of the ancients,
by the doctor. p. 136
CHAP. LVI.
An adventure happens to Pipes, in consequence of
which he is dismissed from Peregrine's service. 
The whole company set out for Ghent in the Diligence. 
Our hero is captivated by a lady in
that carriage; interests her spiritual director in
his behalf. p. 145
CHAP. LVII.
He makes some progress in her affections; is interrupted
by a dispute between Jolter and a Jew; 
appeases the wrath of the Capuchin, who procures
for him an interview with his fair enslaver,
in which he finds himself deceived. p. 153

CHAP. LVIII.
He makes another effort towards the accomplishment
of his wish, which is postponed by a strange accident. p. 159
CHAP. LIX.
They depart from Ghent. Our hero engages in a
political dispute with his mistress, whom he offends,
and pacifies with submission. He practises
an expedient to detain the carriage at Alost,
and confirms the priest in his interest. p. 165
CHAP. LX.
The French coquet entraps the heart of the Jew,
against whom Pallet enters into a conspiracy; by
which Peregrine is again disappointed, and the
Hebrew's incontinence exposed. p. 172
CHAP. LXI.
Pallet, endeavouring to unravel the mystery of the
treatment he had received, falls out of the frying
pan into the fire. p. 178
CHAP. LXII.
Peregrine, almost distracted with his disappointments,
conjures the fair Fleming to permit his
visits at Brussels. She withdraws from his
pursuit. p. 192
CHAP. LXIII.
Peregrine meets with Mrs. Hornbeck, and is consoled
for his loss. His valet de chambre is embroiled
with her duenna, whom, however, he
finds means to appease. p. 197

CHAP. LXIV.
Hornbeck is informed of his wife's adventure with
Peregrine, for whom he prepares a stratagem,
which is rendered ineffectual by the information
of Pipes. The husband is ducked for his intention,
and our hero apprehended by the patrole. p. 204
CHAP. LXV.
Peregrine is released. Jolter confounded at his
mysterious conduct. A contest happens between
the poet and painter, who are reconciled by the
mediation of their fellow travellers. p. 211
CHAP. LXVI.
Peregrine renews his inquiries about his lost Amanda,
in the course of which he is engaged in an intrigue
with a nun, which produces strange consequences. p. 219
CHAP. LXVII.
The travellers depart for Antwerp, at which place
the painter gives a loose to his enthusiasm. p. 229
CHAP. LXVIII.
Peregrine artfully foments a quarrel between Pallet
and the physician, who fight a duel on the
ramparts. p. 237
CHAP. LXIX.
The doctor exults in his victory. They set out for
Rotterdam, where they are entertained by two
Dutch gentlemen in a yacht, which is overturned
in the Maes, to the manifest hazard of the
painter's life. They spend the evening with their
entertainers, and next day visit a cabinet of curiosities. p. 247

CHAP. LXX.
They proceed to the Hague; from whence they depart
for Amsterdam, where they see a Dutch
tragedy. Visit a musick-house, in which Peregrine
quarrels with the captain of a man of war. 
They pass through Haarlem, in their way to
Leyden. Return to Rotterdam, where the
company separates, and our hero, with his attendants,
arrives in safety at Harwich. p. 255
CHAP. LXXI.
Peregrine delivers his letters of recommendation at
London, and returns to the garison, to the unspeakable
joy of the commodore and his whole
family. p. 262
CHAP. LXXII.
Sees his sister happily married. Visits Emilia, who
receives him according to his deserts. p. 271
CHAP. LXXIII.
He attends his uncle with great affection, during
a fit of illness. Sets out again for London; 
meets with his friend Godfrey, who is prevailed
upon to accompany him to Bath; on the road to
which place, they chance to dine with a person,
who entertains them with a curious account of a
certain company of adventurers. p. 277
CHAP. LXXIV.
Godfrey executes a scheme at Bath, by which a
whole company of sharpers is ruined. p. 284
CHAP. LXXV.
The two friends eclipse all their competitors in gallantry,
and practise a pleasant project of revenge
upon the physicians of the place. p. 290

CHAP. LXXXVI.
They distress the housekeepers of Bath, by another
mischievous contrivance. Peregrine humbles a
noted hector, and meets with a strange character
the house of a certain lady. p. 300
CHAP. LXXVII.
He cultivates an acquaintance with the Misanthrope,
who favours him with a short sketch of
his own history. p. 309
CHAP. LXXVIII.
A treaty is concluded betwixt Cadwallader and our
hero; in consequence of which, divers pleasant
adventures occur, until the young gentleman is
summoned to the garison, on a very interesting
occasion. 317