


Strap moralizes—presents his purse to me— 
we inform our landlord of my misfortune,
who unravels the mystery—I present myself
to Cringer—he recommends and turns
me over to Mr. Staytape—I become acquainted
with a fellow-dependant, who explains
the characters of Cringer and Staytape
—and informs me of the method to
be pursued at the Navy-office and Surgeon's-hall
—Strap is employed. 
In our way to our lodging, after a profound
silence on both sides, Strap with a hideous
groan observed, that we had brought our pigs to
a fine market. To this I made no reply, and
he went on: “God send us well out of this
place, we have not been in London eight and
forty hours, and I believe we have met with
eight and forty thousand misfortunes. —We
have been jeered, reproached, buffetted, pissed
upon, and at last stript of our money; and I
suppose by and by we shall be stript of our
skins. —Indeed, as to the money part of it,
that was owing to our own folly; Solomon
says, Bray a fool in a mortar, and he will never
be wise. Ah! God help us, an ounce of prudence
is worth a pound of gold.” This was
no time for him to tamper with my disposition,
already mad with my loss, and inflamed with resentment 

against him, who had refused me a little
money to attempt to retrieve it. I therefore,
turned towards him with a stern countenance,
and asked him, “Who he called fool!” Being
altogether unaccustomed with such looks from me,
he stood still and stared in my face for some time; 
then, with some confusion, uttered “Fool! — 
I called no body fool but myself;—I am sure,
I am the greatest fool of the two, for being so
much concerned at other people's misfortunes; 
—but Nemo omnibus horis sapit.—that's all— 
that's all.” —Upon which a silence ensued that
brought us to our lodging, where I threw myself
into the bed in an agony of despair, resolving
to perish for want, rather than apply to my
companion or any other body for relief; but Strap,
who knew my temper, and whose heart bled
within him at my distress, after some pause,
came to the bed-side, and putting a leather purse
into my hand, burst into tears, crying, “I
know what you think: but I scorn your
thoughts. —There's all I have in the world,
take it, and I'll perhaps get more for you before
that be done—if not, I'll beg for you,
steal for you, go through the wide world with
you, and starve with you, for though I be a
poor cobler's son, I am no scout.” —I was so
touched with the generous passion of this poor
creature, that I could not refrain from weeping
also, and we mingled our tears together for some
time. 
—Upon examining the purse, I found in it
two half guineas and half a crown, which I
would have returned to him, saying, he knew
better than I how to manage it; but he absolutely
refused my proposal, and told me, it was more
reasonable and decent that he should depend upon 

me who was a gentleman, than that I should be
controuled by him. 
After this friendly contest was over, and our
minds more at ease, we informed our landlord of
what had happened to us, taking care to conceal
the extremity to which we were reduced: He no
sooner heard the story, than he assured us we
had been grievously imposed upon by a couple of
sharpers, who were associates; and that this polite,
honest, friendly, humane person, who had
treated us so civilly, was no other than a rascally
money-dropper, who made it his business to decoy
strangers in that manner, to one of his own
haunts, where an accomplice or two was always
waiting to assist in pillaging the prey they had
run down. —Here the good man recounted a
great many stories of people who had been seduced,
cheated, pilfered, beat,—nay, even
murdered by such villains. I was confounded at
the artifice and wickedness of mankind, and Strap
lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed
that God would deliver him from scenes of such
iniquity; for surely the devil had set up his throne
in London. —Our landlord being curious to know
what reception we had met with at Mr. Cringer's,
we acquainted him with the particulars, at which
he shook his head, and told us, we had not gone
the right way to work; that there was nothing
to be done with a m&wblank;b&wblank;r of p&wblank;m&wblank;t without
a bribe; that the servant was commonly infected
with the master's disease, and expected to be paid
for his work, as well as his betters. —He therefore
advised me to give the footman a shilling
the next time I desired admittance to my patron,
or else I should scarce find an opportunity to deliver
my letter. Accordingly, next morning, 

when the door was opened, I slipt a shilling into
his hand, and told him I had a letter for his
master. —I found the good effects of my liberality; 
for the fellow let me in immediately, and
taking the letter out of my hand, desired me to
wait in a kind of passage, for an answer. In
this place I continued standing three quarters of
an hour, during which time I saw a great many
young fellows, whom I formerly knew in Scotland,
pass and repass, with an air of familiarity
in their way to and from the audience chamber:
while I was fain to stand shivering in the cold,
and turn my back to them, that they might not
perceive the lowness of my condition. —At length,
Mr. Cringer came out to see a young gentleman
to the door, who was no other than 'squire
Gawky, dressed in a very gay suit of cloaths: 
At parting Mr. Cringer shook him by the hand,
and told him he hoped to have the pleasure of his
company at dinner. Then turning about towards
me, asked what were my commands: when he
understood I was the person who had brought the
letter from Mr. Crab, he affected to recollect
my name, which however, he pretended he could
not do, till he had consulted the letter again; 
to save him that trouble, I told him my name
was Random. —Upon which he went on,
“Ay, ay, Random, Random, Random— 
I think I remember the name;” and very
well he might, for this very individual Mr.
Cringer had many a time rode before my grandfather's
cloak-bag, in quality of footman. — 
“Well, (says he) you propose to go on board
a man of war, as surgeon's mate.” To which
I replied by a low bow. “I believe it will be a
difficult matter (continued he) to procure a 

warrant, there being already such a swarm of
Scotch surgeons at the navy office, in expectation
of the next vacancy, that the commissioners
are afraid of being torn in pieces, and
have actually applied for a guard to protect
them. —However, some ships will soon be put
in commission, and then we shall see what's
to be done.” —So saying, he left me, exceedingly
mortified at the different reception Mr.
Gawky and I had met with from this upstart,
proud, mean member, who (I imagined) would
have thought it an happiness to have it in his
power to be grateful for the obligations he owed
to my family. 
At my return, I was surprized with the agreeable
news of Strap's being employed on the recommendation
of his friend the school-master,
by a perriwig-maker in the neighbourhood, who
allowed him five shillings per week, besides bed
and board. —I continued to dance attendance every
other morning at the levée of Mr. Cringer, during
a fortnight, in which time I became acquainted
with a young fellow of my own country
and profession, who also depended on the member's
interest; but was treated with much more
respect than I, both by the servants and master,
being often admitted into a parlour, where there
was a fire, for the convenience of the better sort
of those who waited for him. —Thither I was
never permitted to penetrate on account of my
appearance, which was not at all fashionable; but
was obliged to stand blowing my fingers in a
cold lobby, and take the first opportunity of Mr.
Cringer's going to the door, to speak with him. 
—One day, while I enjoyed this occasion, a
person was introduced, whom Mr. Cringer no 

sooner saw, then running towards him, he saluted
him with a bow to the very ground, and afterwards
shaking him by the hand with great heartiness
and familiarity, called him his good friend,
and asked very kindly how Mrs. Staytape, and
the young ladies did; then, after a whisper which
continued some minutes, wherein I over-heard
the word Honour repeated several times with
great emphasis, Mr. Cringer introduced me to
this gentleman, as to a person whose advice and
assistance I might depend upon, and having given
me his direction, followed me to the door, where
he told me, I needed not give myself the trouble
to call at his house any more, for Mr. Staytape
would do my business for me. At that instant my
fellow dependant coming out after me, over-heard
the discourse of Mr. Cringer, and making up to
me in the street, accosted me very civilly, which
I looked upon as no small honour, considering the
figure he made; for he was dressed in a blue frock
with a gold button, a green silk waistcoat trimmed
with gold, black velvet breeches, white silk
stockings, silver buckles, a gold-laced hat, a spencer
wig, and a silver hilted hanger, with a fine
clouded cane in his hand. —“I perceive (says he)
you are but lately come from Scotland:—pray
what may your business with Mr. Cringer be? 
—I suppose it is no secret—and I may possibly
give you some advice that will be serviceable; 
for I have been surgeon's second mate on board
of a seventy-gun ship, and consequently
know a good deal of the world.” —I made no
scruple to disclose my situation, which when he
had learned, he shook his head, and told me he had
been pretty much in the same circumstances about
a year ago; that he had relied on Cringer's promises 

so long, that his money (which was considerable)
as well as his credit, was quite exhausted; 
and when he wrote to his relations for a fresh supply,
instead of money, he received nothing but
reproaches, and the epithets of idle, debauched
fellow: That after he had waited at the Navy-Office
many months for a warrant, to no purpose,
he was fain to pawn some of his cloaths,
which raised him a small sum, wherewith he
bribed the s&wblank;t&wblank;y, who soon procured a warrant
for him, notwithstanding he had affirmed the
same day, that there was not one vacancy. — 
That he had gone on board, where he remained
nine months; at the end of which the ship was
put out of commission, and the company to be
paid off in Broad-street the very next day. —That
his relations being reconcil'd to him, had charg'd
him to pay his devoirs regularly to Mr. Cringer,
who had informed them by letter, that his interest
alone had procured the warrant; in obedience to
which command, he came to his levee every morning
as I saw, though he looked upon him to be a very
pitiful scoundrel—In conclusion, he asked me
if I had yet passed at Surgeon's-Hall? To which
I answered, I did not so much as know it was
necessary—“Necessary! (cried he) O lord, O
lord! I find I must instruct you—come along
with me, and I'll give you some information
about that matter.” —So saying, he carried
me into an ale-house, where he called for some
beer and bread and cheese, on which we breakfasted. 
While we sat in this place, he told me
I must first go to the Navy-Office, and write to
the board, desiring them to order a letter for me
to the Surgeon's-Hall, that I may be examined
touching my skill in surgery: That the Surgeons, 

after having examined me, would give me my
qualification sealed up in form of a letter directed
to the commissioners, which qualification I must
deliver to the secretary of the board, who would
open it in my presence, and read the contents. 
After which, I must employ my interest to be
provided for as soon as possible—That the expence
of his qualification for second mate of a
third rate, amounted to thirteen shillings, exclusive
of the warrant, which cost him half a guinea
and half a crown, besides the present to the secretary,
which consisted of a three pound twelve
piece. —This calculation was like a thunder-bolt
to me, whose whole fortune did not amount to
twelve shillings—I accordingly made him acquainted
with this part of my distress, after having
thanked him for his information and advice. 
—He condoled with me on this occasion; but
bid me be of good chear, for he had conceived a
friendship for me, and would make all things
easy. —'Tis true he was run out at present, but
to-morrow or next day, he was certain of receiving
a considerable sum; of which he would lend
me what would be sufficient to answer my exigences. 
This frank declaration pleased me so
much, that I pulled out my purse and emptied it
before him, begging him to take what he pleased
for pocket expence until he should receive his
own money. —With a good deal of pressing he
was prevailed upon to take five shillings, telling
me that he might have what money he pleased at
any time, for the trouble of going into the city; 
but as he had met with me, he would defer his
going thither till to-morrow, when I should go
along with him, and he would put me in a way
of acting for myself, without a servile dependance 

on that rascal Cringer, much less on the lousy
taylor to whom I heard him turn you over. — 
“How (cried I) is Mr. Staytape a taylor?” — 
“No less, I'll assure you (answer'd he) and I
confess, more likely to serve you than the
member: For provided you can entertain him
with politics and conundrums, you may have
credit with him for as many and as rich cloaths
as you please.” —I told him, I was utterly
ignorant of both, and so incens'd at Cringer's
usage, that I would never set my foot within his
door again. —After a good deal more conversation,
my new acquaintance and I parted, having
made an appointment to meet next day at the
same place, in order to set out for the city. —I
went immediately to Strap, and related every
thing which had happen'd, but he did not at all
approve of my being so forward to lend money to
a stranger, especially as we had been already so
much impos'd upon by appearances. “However,
(said he) if you are sure he is a Scotchman,
I believe you are safe.” 