


Which shews, 
That a man cannot always sip,
When the cup is at his lip.
Those who have felt the doubts,
the jealousies, the resentments,
the humiliations, the hopes, the despair,
the impatience, and, in a word,
the infinite disquiets of love, will be 

able to conceive the sea of agitation on
which our adventurer was tossed all
night long, without repose or intermission. 
Sometimes he resolved to
employ all his industry and address in
discovering the place in which Aurelia
was sequestred, that he might rescue
her from the supposed restraint to
which she had been subjected. But,
when his heart beat high with the anticipation
of this exploit, he was suddenly
invaded, and all his ardour
checked, by the remembrance of that
fatal letter, written and signed by her
own hand, which had divorced him
from all hope, and first unsettled his
understanding. The emotions waked
by this remembrance were so strong,
that he leaped from the bed, and, the
fire being still burning in the chimney,
lighted a candle, that he might once
more banquet his spleen by reading the
original billet, which, together with
the ring he had received from Miss
Darnel's mother, he kept in a small
box, carefully deposited within his
portmanteau. This being instantly 

unlocked, he unfolded the paper,
and recited the contents in these
words: 

“Sir, Obliged as I am by the passion
you profess, and the eagerness
with which you endeavour to give me
the most convincing proof of your regard,
I feel some reluctance in making
you acquainted with a circumstance,
which, in all probability, you will not
learn without some disquiet. But the
affair is become so interesting, I am
compelled to tell you, that however
agreeable your proposals may have
been to those whom I thought it my
duty to please by every reasonable concession,
and howsoever you may have
been flattered by the seeming complacency
with which I have heard your
addresses, I now find it absolutely necessary
to speak in a decisive strain, to
assure you, that, without sacrificing my
own peace, I cannot admit a continuation
of your correspondence; and
that your regard for me will be best
shewn by your desisting from a pursuit, 

which is altogether inconsistent
with the happiness of 
“Aurelia Darnel.” 
Having pronounced aloud the words
that composed this dismission, he hastily
replaced the cruel scroll; and,
being too well acquainted with the
hand to harbour the least doubt of its
being genuine, threw himself into his
bed in a transport of despair, mingled
with resentment; during the predominancy
of which, he determined to
proceed in the career of adventure, and
endeavour to forget the unkindness of
his mistress, amidst the avocations of
knight-errantry. Such was the resolution
that governed his thoughts,
when he rose in the morning, ordered
Crabshaw to saddle Bronzomarte, and
demanded a bill of his expence. Before
these orders could be executed,
the good woman of the house, entering
his apartment, told him, with
marks of concern, that the poor young
lady, Miss Meadows, had dropped her 

pocket-book in the next chamber,
where it was found by the hostess,
who now presented it unopened. 
Our knight, having called in Mrs.
Oakley and her son as witnesses, unfolded
the book, without reading one
syllable of the contents, and found in
it five bank-notes, amounting to two
hundred and thirty pounds. Perceiving,
at once, that the loss of this
treasure might be attended with the
most embarrassing consequences to the
owner, and reflecting that this was a
case which demanded the immediate
interposition and assistance of chivalry,
he declared, that he himself would
convey it safely into the hands of Miss
Meadows; and desired to know the
road she had pursued, that he might
set out in quest of her, without a moment's
delay. It was not without
some difficulty that this information
was obtained from the post-boy, who
had been enjoined secrecy by the lady,
and even gratified with a handsome reward
for his promised discretion. The
same method was used to make him 

disgorge his trust: he undertook to
conduct Sir Launcelot, who hired a
post-chaise for dispatch, and immediately
departed, after having directed
his squire to follow his tract with the
horses. 
Yet, whatever haste he made, it is
absolutely necessary for the reader's satisfaction,
that we should outstrip the
chaise, and visit the ladies before his
arrival. We shall therefore, without
circumlocution, premise, that Miss
Meadows was no other than that paragon
of beauty and goodness, the all-accomplished
Miss Aurelia Darnel. 
She had, with that meekness of resignation
peculiar to herself, for some
years submitted to every species of
oppression which her uncle's tyranny
of disposition could plan, and his unlimited
power of guardianship execute,
till, at length, it rose to such a pitch
of despotism as she could not endure. 
He had projected a match between
his niece and one Philip Sycamore,
Esq; a young man who possessed a
pretty considerable estate in the North 

Country; who liked Aurelia's person,
but was enamoured of her fortune,
and had offered to purchase Anthony's
interest and alliance with certain concessions,
which could not but be agreeable
to a man of loose principles, who
would have found it a difficult task to
settle the accounts of his wardship. 
According to the present estimate
of matrimonial felicity, Sycamore
might have found admittance as a future
son-in-law in any private family
of the kingdom. He was by birth a
gentleman, tall, straight, and muscular,
with a fair, sleek, unmeaning face,
that promised more simplicity than ill-nature. 
His education had not been
neglected, and he inherited an estate of
five thousand a year. Miss Darnel,
however, had penetration enough to
discover and despise him as a strange
composition of rapacity and profusion,
absurdity and good-sense, bashfulness
and impudence, self-conceit and diffidence,
aukwardness and ostentation,
insolence and good-nature, rashness
and timidity. He was continually surrounded 

and preyed upon by certain
vermin called led-captains and buffoons,
who shewed him in leading-strings
like a sucking giant, rifled his
pockets without ceremony, ridiculed
him to his face, traduced his character,
and exposed him in a thousand ludicrous
attitudes for the diversion of
the public; while, all the time, he
knew their knavery, saw their drift,
detested their morals, and despised
their understanding. He was so infatuated
by indolence of thought, and
communication with folly, that he
would have rather suffered himself to
be led into a ditch with company, than
be at the pains of going over a bridge
alone; and involved himself in a thousand
difficulties, the natural consequences
of an error in the first concoction,
which, though he plainly saw
it, he had not resolution enough to
avoid. 
Such was the character of squire Sycamore,
who professed himself the rival
of Sir Launcelot Greaves in the good
graces of Miss Aurelia Darnel. He 

had in this pursuit persevered with
more constancy and fortitude, than he
ever exerted in any other instance. 
Being generally needy, from extravagance,
he was stimulated by his
wants, and animated by his vanity,
which was artfully instigated by his
followers, who hoped to share the
spoils of his success. These motives
were reinforced by the incessant and
eager exhortations of Anthony Darnel,
who, seeing his ward in the last year
of her minority, thought there was no
time to be lost in securing his own indemnification,
and snatching his niece
for ever from the hopes of Sir Launcelot,
whom he now hated with redoubled
animosity. Finding Aurelia deaf
to all his remonstrances, proof against
ill-usage, and resolutely averse to the
proposed union with Sycamore, he endeavoured
to detach her thoughts
from Sir Launcelot, by forging tales to
the prejudice of his constancy and moral
character; and, finally, by recapitulating
the proofs and instances of his
distraction, which he particularized 

with the most malicious exaggerations. 
In spite of all his arts, he found it
impracticable to surmount her objections
to the purposed alliance, and
therefore changed his battery. Instead
of transferring her to the arms of
his friend, he resolved to detain her in
his own power by a legal claim, which
would invest him with the uncontrouled
management of her affairs. 
This was a charge of lunacy, in consequence
of which he hoped to obtain
a commission, to secure a jury to his
wish, and be appointed sole committee
of her person, as well as steward on
her estate, of which he would then be
heir apparent. As the first steps towards
the execution of this honest
scheme, he had subjected Aurelia to
the superintendency and direction of
an old duenna, who had been formerly
the procuress of his pleasures; 
and hired a new set of servants, who
were given to understand, at their first
admission, that the young lady was
disordered in her brain. 

An impression of this nature is easily
preserved among servants, when the
master of the family thinks his interest
is concerned in supporting the imposture. 
The melancholy produced
from her confinement, and the vivacity
of her resentment under ill-usage,
were, by the address of Anthony,
and the prepossession of his domesticks,
perverted into the effects of insanity; 
and the same interpretation was strained
upon her most indifferent words and
actions. The tydings of Miss Darnel's
disorder were carefully circulated in
whispers, and soon reached the ears
of Mr. Sycamore, who was not at all
pleased with the information. From
his knowledge of Anthony's disposition,
he suspected the truth of the report; 
and unwilling to see such a
prize ravished, as it were, from his
grasp, he, with the advice and assistance
of his myrmidons, resolved to set the
captive at liberty, in full hope of turning
the adventure to his own advantage:
for he argued in this manner: 
“If she is in fact compos mentis, her 

gratitude will opetate in my behalf,
and even prudence will advise her to
embrace the proffered asylum from
the villany of her uncle. If she is
really disordered, it will be no great
difficulty to deceive her into a marriage,
and then I become her trustee
of course.” 
The plan was well conceived; but
Sycamore had not discretion enough
to keep his own counsel. From
weakness and vanity, he blabbed the
design, which in a little time was
communicated to Anthony Darnel; 
and he took his precautions accordingly. 
Being infirm in his own person,
and consequently unfit for opposing
the violence of some desperadoes,
whom he knew to be the satellites of
Sycamore, he prepared a private retreat
for his ward at the house of an
old gentleman, the companion of his
youth, whom he had imposed upon
with the fiction of her being disordered
in her understanding, and amused
with a story of a dangerous design
upon her person. Thus cautioned and 

instructed, the gentleman had gone
with his own coach and servants to receive
Aurelia and her governante at a
third house, to which she had been
privately removed from her uncle's
habitation; and in this journey it was,
that she had been so accidentally protected
from the violence of the robbers
by the interposition and prowess of
our adventurer. 
As he did not wear his helmet in
that exploit, she recognized his features
as he passed the coach, and,
struck with the apparition, shrieked aloud. 
She had been assured by her
guardian, that his design was to convey
her to her own house; but perceiving,
in the sequel, that the carriage
struck off upon a different road,
and finding herself in the hands of
strangers, she began to dread a much
more disagreeable fate, and conceive
doubts and ideas that filled her tender
heart with horror and affliction. When
she expostulated with the duenna, she
was treated like a changeling, admonished
to be quiet, and reminded that 

she was under the direction of those
who would manage her with a tender
regard to her own welfare, and the
honour of her family. When she addressed
herself to the old gentleman,
who was not much subject to the emotions
of humanity, and besides firmly
persuaded that she was deprived of her
reason, he made no answer; but laid
his finger on his mouth, by way of
enjoining silence. 
This mysterious behaviour aggravated
the fears of the poor hapless young
lady; and her terrors waxed so strong,
that when she saw Tom Clarke, whose
face she knew, she called aloud for
assistance, and even pronounced the
name of his patron Sir Launcelot
Greaves, which she imagined might
stimulate him the more to attempt
something for her deliverance. 
The reader has already been informed
in what manner the endeavours
of Tom and his uncle miscarried. 
Miss Darnel's new keeper having, in
the course of his journey, halted for
refreshment at the Black Lyon, of 

which being landlord, he believed the
good woman and her family were intirely
devoted to his will and pleasure,
Aurelia found an opportunity of speaking
in private to Dolly, who had a
very prepossessing appearance. She
conveyed a purse of money into the
hands of this young woman, telling
her, while the tears trickled down her
cheeks, that she was a young lady of
fortune, in danger, as she apprehended,
of assassination. This hint, which she
communicated in a whisper, while the
governante stood at the other end of
the room, was sufficient to interest
the compassionate Dolly in her behalf. 
As soon as the coach departed, she
made her mother acquainted with the
transaction; and as they naturally concluded
that the young lady expected
their assistance, they resolved to approve
themselves worthy of her confidence. 
Dolly having inlisted in their design
a trusty countryman, one of her own
professed admirers, they set out together
for the house of the gentleman in 

which the fair prisoner was confined,
and waited for her in secret at the end
of a pleasant park, in which they naturally
concluded she might be indulged
with the privilege of taking the
air. The event justified their conception:
on the very first day of their
watch they saw her approach, accompanied
by her duenna. Dolly and her
attendant immediately tied their horses
to a stake, and retired into a thicket,
which Aurelia did not fail to enter. 
Dolly forthwith appeared, and, taking
her by the hand, led her to the horses,
one of which she mounted in the utmost
hurry and trepidation, while the
countryman bound the duenna with a
cord, prepared for the purpose, gagged
her mouth, and tied her to a tree,
where he left her to her own meditations. 
Then he mounted before Dolly,
and through unfrequented paths conducted
his charge to an inn on the post-road,
where a chaise was ready for
their reception. 
As he refused to proceed farther,
lest his absence from his own home 

should create suspicion, Aurelia rewarded
him liberally; but would not
part with her faithful Dolly, who, indeed,
had no inclination to be discharged:
such an affection and attachment
had she already acquired for
the amiable fugitive, though she knew
neither her story, nor her true name. 
Aurelia thought proper to conceal
both, and assumed the fictitious appellation
of Meadows, until she should
be better acquainted with the disposition
and discretion of her new attendant. 
The first resolution she could
take in the present flutter of her spirits,
was to make the best of her way to
London, where she thought she might
find an asylum in the house of a female
relation, married to an eminent
physician, known by the name of
Kawdle. In the execution of this hasty
resolve, she travelled at a violent rate,
from stage to stage, in a carriage drawn
by four horses, without halting for necessary
refreshment or repose, until she
judged herself out of danger of being
overtaken. As she appeared overwhelmed 

with grief and consternation
the good-natured Dolly endeavoured
to alleviate her distress with diverting
discourse; and, among other less interesting
stories, entertained her with
the adventures of Sir Launcelot and
captain Crowe, which she had seen
and heard recited while they remained
at the Black Lyon: nor did she fail
to introduce Mr. Thomas Clarke, in
her narrative, with such a favourable
representation of his person and character,
as plainly discovered that her
own heart had received a rude shock
from the irresistible force of his qualifications. 
The history of Sir Launcelot
Greaves was a theme which effectually
fixed the attention of Aurelia,
distracted as her ideas must have been
by the circumstances of her present
situation. The particulars of his conduct,
since the correspondence between
her and him had ceased, she
heard with equal concern and astonishment; 
for, how far soever she
deemed herself detached from all 

possibility of future connexion with
that young gentleman, she was not
made of such indifferent stuff, as to
learn without emotion the calamitous
disorder of an accomplished youth,
whose extraordinary virtues she could
not but revere. 
As they had deviated from the
post-road, taken precautions to conceal
their route, and made such progress,
that they were now within one
day's journey of London, the careful
and affectionate Dolly seeing her dear
lady quite exhausted with fatigue, used
all her natural rhetoric, which was very
powerful, mingled with tears that
flowed from the heart, in persuading
Aurelia to enjoy some repose; and so
far she succeeded in the attempt, that
for one night the toil of travelling was
intermitted. This recess from incredible
fatigue, was a pause that afforded
our adventurer time to overtake
them before they reached the metropolis,
that vast labyrinth, in which
Aurelia might have been for ever lost
to his inquiry. 

It was in the afternoon of the day
which succeeded his departure from
the White Hart, that Sir Launcelot
arrived at the inn, where Miss Aurelia
Darnel had bespoke a dish of tea, and
a post-chaise for the next stage. He
had, by inquiry, traced her a considerable
way, without ever dreaming
who the person really was whom
he thus pursued, and now he desired
to speak with her attendant. Dolly
was not a little surprised to see Sir
Launcelot Greaves, of whose character
she had conceived a very sublime
idea, from the narrative of Mr
Thomas Clarke; but she was still
more surprised when he gave her to
understand, that he had charged himself
with the pocket-book, containing
the bank-notes, which Miss Meadows
had dropped in the house where
they had been threatened with insult. 
Miss Darnel had not yet discovered
her disaster, when her attendant, running
into the apartment, presented
the prize, which she had received
from our adventurer, with his compliments 

to Miss Meadows, implying
a request to be admitted into her presence,
that he might make a personal
tender of his best services. 
It is not to be supposed that the
amiable Aurelia heard unmoved such
a message from a person, whom her
maid discovered to be the very identical
Sir Launcelot Greaves, whose
story she had so lately related: but as
the ensuing scene requires fresh attention
in the reader, we shall defer
it till another opportunity, when his
spirits shall be recruited from the fatigue
of this chapter. 