


A disagreeable accident happens to me in the
discharge of my office—Morgan's nose
is offended—a dialogue between him and
the ship's steward—upon examination,
I find more causes of complaint than one
—my hair is cut off—Morgan's
Cookery—the manner of sleeping on board
—I am waked in the night by a dreadful
noise. 
I could not comprehend how it was possible
for the attendants to come near those who
hung on the inside towards the sides of the ship,
in order to assist them, as they seemed barricadoed
by those who lay on the outside, and entirely
out of the reach of all visitation. —Much
less could I conjecture how my friend Thomson
would be able to administer clysters, that were
ordered for some in that situation. —When I saw
him thrust his wig in his pocket, and strip himself
to his waistcoat in a moment, then creep on
all fours, under the hammocks of the sick, and
forcing up his bare pate between two, kept them
asunder with one shoulder, until he had done his
duty. —Eager to learn the service, I desired he
would give me leave to perform the next operation
of that kind; he consenting, I undressed
myself after his example, and crawling along,
the ship happened to roll, which alarmed me; 

I laid hold of the first thing that came within
my grasp, with such violence, that I overturned
it, and soon found by the smell that issued upon
me, I had not unlocked a box of the most delicious
perfume; it was well for me that my nostrils
was none of the most delicate, else I know not
how I might have been affected by this vapour,
which diffused itself all over the ship to the utter
discomposure of every body who tarried on
the same deck;—neither was the consequence of
this disgrace confined to my sense of smelling
only, for I felt my misfortune more ways than
one. That I might not, however, appear altogether
disconcerted in this my coup d'essaì, I got
up, and pushing my head with great force between
two hammocks, towards the middle, where
the greatest resistance was, I made an opening indeed,
but not understanding the knack of dexterously
turning my shoulder to maintain my advantage,
I had the mortification to find myself stuck
up as it were in a pillory, and the weight of
three or four people bearing on each side of my
neck, so that I was in danger of strangulation. 
—While I remained in this defenceless posture,
one of the sick men, rendered peevish by his
distemper, was so enraged at the smell I had occasioned,
and the rude shock he had received
from me in my elevation, that with many bitter
reproaches, he seized me by the nose, which he
tweaked so unmercifully that I roared with anguish. 
Thomson perceiving my condition, ordered
one of the waiters to my assistance, who
with much difficulty disengaged me from this embarras,
and hindered me from taking vengeance
of the sick man, whose indisposition would not 

have screened him from the effects of my indignation. 
After having made an end of our ministry for
that time, we descended to the cockpit, my
friend comforting me for what had happened, with
a homely proverb, which I do not chuse to repeat. 
—When we had got half way down the ladder,
Mr. Morgan, before he saw us, having intelligence
by his nose, of the approach of something
extraordinary, cried, “Cot have mercy upon
my senses! I pelieve the enemy has poarded us
in a stink-pot!” Then directing his discourse
to the steward, from whom he imagined the
odour proceeded, he reprimanded him severely
for the freedoms he took among gentlemen of
birth, threatned to smoak him like a padger with
sulphur, if ever he should presume to offend his
neighbours with such smells, for the future: The
steward, conscious of his own innocence, replied
with some warmth, “I know of no smells but
those of your own making.” —This repartee
introduced a smart dialogue, in which the Welchman
undertook to prove, that though the stench
he complained of, did not flow from the steward's
own body, he was nevertheless the author of it,
by serving out damaged provisions to the ship's
company; and in particular, putrified cheese,
from the use of which only, he affirmed, such
unsavoury steams could arise. —Then he launched
out into praises of good cheese, of which he gave
the analysis; explained the different kinds of that
commodity, with the methods practised to make
and preserve it; and concluded with observing,
that in yielding good cheese, the county of Glamorgan
might vie with Cheshire itself, and was
much superior to it in the produce of goats and 

putter. —I gathered from this conversation, that
if I went into the birth in my present pickle, I
should be no welcome guest, and therefore desired
Mr. Thomson to go before, and represent
my calamity; at which the first mate expressing
some concern, went upon deck immediately,
taking his way through the cable tire, and by the
main hatchway, to avoid encountering with me; 
desiring me to clean myself as soon as possible,
for he intended to regale himself with a dish of
salmagundy and a pipe. —Accordingly, I set about
this disagreeable business, and soon found I had
more causes of complaint than I at first imagined: 
For I perceived some guests had honoured me with
their company, whose visit I did not at all think
seasonable; neither did they seem inclined to leave
me in a hurry, being in possession of my chief
quarters, where they fed without reserve at the
expence of my blood. —But considering it would
be much easier to extirpate this ferocious colony
in the infancy of their settlement, than after they
should be multiplied and naturalized to the soil,
I took the advice of my friend, who, to prevent
such misfortunes, went always closs shaved, and
made the boy of our mess cut off my hair,
which had been growing since I left the service
of Lawement. The second mate lent me an old
bob wig to supply the loss of that covering. 
This affair being ended, and every thing adjusted
in the best manner my circumstances
would permit, the descendant of Caractacus returned,
and ordering the boy to bring a piece
of salt beef from the brine, cut off a slice and
mixed it with an equal quantity of onions,
which seasoning with a moderate proportion of
pepper and salt, he brought it into a consistence 

with oil and vinegar. —Then tasting the dish,
assured us, it was the best salmagundie, that ever
he made, and recommended it to our palate with
such heartiness, that I could not help doing honour
to his preparation. But I had no sooner
swallowed a mouthful, than I thought my entrails
were scorched, and endeavoured with a deluge of
small beer, to allay the heat it occasioned. — 
Supper being over, Mr. Morgan having smoaked
a couple of pipes, and supplied the moisture he
had expended with as many cans of flip, of which
we all partook, a certain yawning began to admonish
me, that it was high time to repair by
sleep the injury I had suffered from want of rest
the preceeding night; which being perceived by
my companions, whose time of repose was by
this time arrived, they proposed we should turn in,
or in other words, go to bed. Our hammocks,
which hung parallel to one another, on the outside
of our birth, were immediately unlashed,
and I beheld each of my mess-mates spring
with great agility into his respective nest, where
they seemed to lie concealed, very much at their
ease. —But it was some time before I could prevail
upon myself to trust my carcase at such a
distance from the ground, in a narrow bag, out
of which, I imagined, I should be apt, on the
least motion in my sleep, to tumble down at the
hazard of breaking my bones. I suffered myself,
however, to be persuaded, and taking a leap to
get in, threw myself quite over, with such violence,
that had I not luckily got hold of Thomson's
hammock, I should have pitched upon my
head on the other side, and in all likelihood
fractured my scull. —After some fruitless efforts,
I succeeded at last; but the apprehension of the 

jeopardy in which I believed myself, withstood
all the attacks of sleep, till towards the morning-watch,
when in spite of my fears, I was over-powered
with slumber: tho' I did not long enjoy this
comfortable situation; being arroused with a noise
so loud and shrill, that I thought the drums of my
ears were burst by it; this was followed by a
dreadful summons pronounced by a hoarse voice,
which I could not understand. While I was debating
with myself whether or not I should wake
my companion, and enquire into the occasion of
this disturbance, I was informed by one of the
quarter-masters, who passed by me with a lanthorn
in his hand, that the noise which alarmed me,
was occasioned by the boatswain's mates who called
up the larboard watch, and that I must lay
my account with such interruption every morning
at the same hour. —Being now more assured of
of my safety, I addressed myself again to rest,
and slept till eight a-clock, when getting up,
and breakfasting with my comrades, on biscuit and
brandy, the sick were visited and assisted as before; 
after which my good friend Thomson explained
and performed another piece of duty, to
which I was a stranger. —At a certain hour in
the morning, the boy of the mess went round all
the decks, ringing a small hand-bell, and in rhimes
composed for the occasion, inviting all those who
had sores to repair before the mast, where one of
the doctor's mates attended, with applications to
dress them. 