


He is indulged with a second audience by the minister,
of whose sincerity he is convinced. His
pride and ambition revive, and again are mortified. 
If the young gentleman's money had been in
other hands, perhaps the peer would have
been at very little pains, either in gratifying his
demand, or opposing his revenge; but he knew
that a sale of the mortgage could not be effected
without an inquiry, to which he did not wish to
be exposed. He therefore employed all his interest
in procuring the solicited audience; which
being granted, Peregrine, with great warmth
and elocution, expatiated upon the injury his
fortune had suffered in the affair of the borough,
for which he had stood candidate; he took notice
of the disappointment he had sustained in the
other election, reminded him of the promises with
which he had been amused, and in conclusion,
desired to know what he had to expect from his
favour. 
The minister having patiently heard him to an
end, replied with a most gracious aspect, that he
was very well informed of his merit and attachment,
and very much disposed to convince him
of the regard which he paid to both; that till of
late, he did not know the nature of his expectations,
neither had he the power of creating posts
for those whom he was inclined to serve; but if
Mr. Pickle would chalk out any feasible method,
by which he could manifest his sentiments of 

friendship, he should not be backward in executing
the plan. 
Peregrine laying hold on this declaration, mentioned
several places which he knew to be vacant; 
but the old evasion was still used: one of them
was not in his department of business; another
had been promised to the third-son of a certain
earl, before the death of the last possessor; and
a third was incumbered with a pension that ate
up a good half of the appointments. In short,
such obstructions were started to all his proposals,
as he could not possibly surmount; though he
plainly perceived, they were no other than specious
pretexts to cover the mortifying side of a
refusal. Exasperated, therefore, at this lack of
sincerity and gratitude, “I can easily foresee,
(said he) that such difficulties will never be wanting,
when I have any thing to ask; and for that
reason, will save myself the trouble of any farther
application.” So saying, he withdrew in a
very abrupt manner, breathing defiance and revenge. 
But this patron, who did not think proper
to drive him to extremities, found means to
persuade his honour, to do something for the
pacification of the young man's choler: and that
same evening our adventurer received a message
from his lordship, desiring to see him immediately. 
In consequence of this intimation, Pickle went
to his house, and appeared before him with a
very cloudy aspect, which signified to whom it
might concern, that his temper was at present
too much galled to endure reproof; and therefore
the sagacious peer forbore taking him to task
for his behaviour during the audience he had obtained; 
but gave him to understand, that the 

minister, in consideration of his services, had
sent him a bank-note for three hundred pounds,
with a promise of the like sum yearly, until he
could be otherwise provided for. This declaration
in some measure appeased the youth, who
condescended to accept the present; and next
levee-day, made his acknowledgment to the donor,
who favoured him with a smile of infinite
complacency, which intirely dissipated all the remains
of his resentment; for, as he could not
possibly divine the true cause of his being temporized
with, he looked upon his condescension
as an undoubted proof of Sir Steady's sincerity,
and firmly believed, that he would settle him in
some place with the first opportunity, rather than
continue to pay this pension out of his own
pocket. In all probability, this prediction would
have been verified, had not an unforeseen accident
in a moment overwhelmed the bark of his
interest at court. 
Mean while, this short gleam of good fortune
recalled the ideas of pride and ambition, which
he had formerly cherished. His countenance
was again lifted up, his good humour retrieved,
and his mien re-exalted. Indeed, he began to be
considered as a rising man by his fellow-dependants,
who saw the particular notice with which
he was favoured at the public levee; and some of
them, for that reason, were at pains to court his
good graces. He no longer shunned his former
intimates, with whom a good part of his fortune
had been spent, but made up to them in all places
of public resort, with the same ease and familiarity
as he had been used to express, and even
reimbarked in some of their excesses, upon the
strength of his sanguine expectation. Cadwallader 

and he renewed their consultations in the court
of ridicule; and divers exploits were atchieved,
to the confusion of those who had sailed into the
North of their displeasure. 
But these enjoyments were soon interrupted by
a misfortune equally fatal and unexpected: his
noble patron was seized with an apoplectic fit,
from which he was recovered by the physicians,
that they might dispatch him according to rule; 
and accordingly, in two months after they were
called, he went the way of all flesh. Peregrine
was very much afflicted at this event, not only
on account of his friendship for the deceased, to
whom he thought himself under many and great
obligations, but also, because he feared that his
own interest would suffer a severe shock, by the
removal of this nobleman, whom he considered
as its chief support. He put himself therefore in
mourning, out of regard to the memory of his
departed friend, and exhibited genuine marks of
sorrow and concern; though he had, in reality,
more cause to grieve than he as yet imagined. 
When quarter day came about, he applied to
the steward of his lordship's heir for the interest
of his money, as usual; and the reader will readily
own he had some reason to be surprized,
when he was told he had no claim either to principal
or interest. True it is, the manager talked
very civilly as well as sensibly on the subject. 
“Your appearance, Sir, (said he to Pickle)
screens you from all suspicion of an intended
fraud; but the mortgage upon those lands you
mention, was granted to another person many
years before you pretend to have lent that sum; 
and I have, this very morning, paid one quarter's 

interest, as appears from this receipt, which
you may peruse for your satisfaction.” 
Peregrine was so thunder-struck at this information,
which stripped him of his all, that he
could not utter one word; a circumstance that
did no great honour to his character, in the opinion
of the steward, who, in good earnest, began
to entertain some doubts of his integrity:
for, among the papers of the deceased, which he
had examined, there was no writing, memorandum,
or receipt, relating to this incumbrance. 
After a long pause of stupefaction, Peregrine recollected
himself so far, as to observe, that either
he was egregiously mistaken, or the predecessor
of his lord the greatest villain upon earth. “But,
Mr. Whatdyecallum, (said he) you must give
me leave to tell you, that your bare assertion, in
this affair, will by no means induce me to put
up quietly with the loss of ten thousand pounds.” 
Having thus expressed himself, he retired from
the house, so discontented at this demur, that he
scarce knew whether he moved upon his head or
heels; and the park chancing to lie in his way,
he sauntered about, giving vent to a soliloquy in
praise of his departed friend, the burden of which
was a string of incoherent curses imprecated upon
himself; till his transports, by degrees, giving
way to his reflection, he deliberated seriously
and sorrowfully upon his misfortune, and resolved
to consult lawyers, without loss of time. But,
first of all, he proposed to make personal application
to the heir, who, by a candid representation
of the case, might be inclined to do him
justice. 
In consequence of this determination, he next
morning put his writings in his pocket, and went 

in a chair to the house of the young nobleman,
to whom being admitted by virtue of his appearance,
and a small gratification to the porter, he
explained the whole affair, corroborating his assertions
with the papers which he produced, and
describing the disgrace that would be intailed upon
the memory of the deceased, should he be obliged
to seek redress in a public court of justice. 
The executor, who was a person of good
breeding, condoled him upon his loss with great
good nature, though he did not seem much surprized
at his account of the matter; but wished,
that since the fraud must have been committed,
the damage had fallen upon the first mortgager,
who (he said) was a thievish usurer, grown rich
by the distresses of his fellow-creatures. In answer
to our hero's remonstrances, he observed,
that he did not look upon himself as obliged to
pay the least regard to the character of his predecessor,
who had used him with great barbarity
and injustice, not only in excluding him from
his countenance and assistance, but also in prejudicing
his inheritance, as much as lay in his
power; so that it could not be reasonably expected,
that he would pay ten thousand pounds
of his debt, for which he had received no value. 
Peregrine, in spite of his chagrin, could not help
owning within himself, that there was a good
deal of reason in this refusal; and after having
given loose to his indignation, in the most violent
invectives against the defunct, took his leave
of the complaisant heir, and had immediate recourse
to the advice of counsel, who assured him
that he had an excellent plea, and was accordingly
retained in the cause. 

All these measures were taken in the first vigour
of his exertion, during which his spirits were
so flustered with the diversity of passions produced
by his mischance, that he mistook for equanimity
that which was no other than intoxication; and
two whole days elapsed, before he arrived at a
due sense of his misfortune. Then indeed he
underwent a woeful self-examination; every circumstance
of the inquiry added fresh pangs to his
reflection; and the result of the whole was a
discovery, that his fortune was totally consumed,
and himself reduced to a state of the most deplorable
dependance. This suggestion alone
might (in the anguish of his despondency) have
driven him to some desperate course, had not it
been in some measure qualified by the confidence
of his lawyers, and the assurance of the minister,
which (slender as the world hath generally found
them) were the only bulwarks between misery
and him. 
The mind is naturally pliable, and, provided
it has the least hope to lean upon, adapts itself
wonderfully to the emergencies of fortune, especially
when the imagination is gay and luxuriant. 
This was the case with our adventurer; instead
of indulging the melancholy ideas which his loss
inspired, he had recourse to the flattering delusions
of hope, soothing himself with unsubstantial
plans of future greatness, and endeavouring
to cover what was past with the veil of oblivion. 
After some hesitation, he resolved to make
Crabtree acquainted with his misfortune, that
once for all he might pass the ordeal of
his satire, without subjecting himself to a long
series of sarcastic hints and doubtful allusions,
which he could not endure. He accordingly 

took the first opportunity of telling him, that he
was absolutely ruined by the perfidy of his patron,
and desired that he would not aggravate
his affliction, by those cynical remarks which were
peculiar to men of his misanthropical disposition. 
Cadwallader listened to this declaration with internal
surprize, which, however, produced no
alteration in his countenance; and, after some
pause, observed, that our hero had no reason to
look for any new observation from him upon
this event, which he had long foreseen, and daily
expected; and exhorted him, with an ironical
sneer, to console himself with the promise of the
minister, who would doubtless discharge the debts
of his deceased bosom-friend. 