


Cadwallader acts the part of a comforter to his
friend; and is in his turn consoled by Peregrine,
who begins to find himself a most egregious dupe. 
This new misfortune, which he justly
charged to the account of his own folly,
recalled his chagrin; and though he endeavoured
with all his might to conceal the affair from the
knowledge of Cadwallader, that prying observer
perceived his countenance overcast; and the projector's
sudden disappearance alarming his suspicion,
he managed his inquiries with so much art,
that in a few days he made himself acquainted
with every particular of the transaction, and resolved
to gratify his spleen at the expence of the
impatient dupe. With this view, he took an
opportunity to accost him with a very serious air,
saying, a friend of his had immediate occasion
for a thousand pounds, and as Peregrine had the
exact sum lying by him, he would take it as a
great favour, if he would part with it for a few
months on undoubted security. Had Pickle
known the true motive of this demand, he
would, in all likelihood, have made a very disagreeable
answer; but Crabtree had wrapt himself
up so securely in the dissimulation of his features,
that the youth could not possibly penetrate
into his intention; and in the most galling suspence
replied, that the money was otherwise engaged. 
The Misanthrope, not contented with
this irritation, assumed the prerogative of a
friend, and questioned him so minutely about the
disposal of the cash, that after numberless evasions, 

which cost him a world of torture to invent,
he could contain his vexation no longer,
but exclaimed in a rage, “Damn your impertinence!
'tis gone to the devil, and that's enough!” 
“Thereafter as it may be (said this tormentor,
with a most provoking indifference of aspect) I
should be glad to know upon what footing; for
I suppose you have some expectation of advantage
from that quarter.” “'Sdeath! Sir (cried
the impatient youth) if I had any expectation
from hell, I would make interest with you, for I
believe from my soul, you are one of its most
favoured ministers upon earth.” With these
words, he flung out of the room, leaving Cadwallader
very well satisfied with the chastisement
he had bestowed. 
Peregrine having cooled himself with a solitary
walk in the park, during which the violence of
his choler gradually evaporated, and his reflection
was called to a serious deliberation upon the
posture of his affairs; he resolved to redouble his
diligence and importunity with his patron and the
minister, in order to obtain some fine-cure,
which would indemnify him for the damage he
had sustained on their account. He accordingly
went to his lordship, and signified his demand,
after having told him, that he had suffered several
fresh losses, which rendered an immediate
provision of that sort necessary to his credit and
subsistence. 
His noble friend commended him for the regard
he manifested for his own interest, which
he considered as a proof of his being at last detached
from the careless inadvertency of youth; 
he approved of his demand, which, he assured
him, should be faithfully transmitted to the minister, 

and backed with all his influence; and
encouraged his hope, by observing, that some
profitable places were at that time vacant, and,
so far as he knew, unengaged. 
This conversation helped to restore the tranquillity
of Pickle's breast, tho' he still harboured
resentment against Cadwallader, on account of
the last insult; and on the instant he formed a plan
of revenge. He knew the misanthrope's remittances
from his estate in the country, had been
of late very scanty, in consequence of repairs and
bankruptcies among his tenants: so that, in spite
of all his frugality, he had been but barely able to
maintain his credit, and even that was engaged
on the strength of his running rent. Being therefore
intimately acquainted with the particulars of
his fortune, he wrote a letter to Crabtree, subscribed
with the name of his principal farmer's
wife, importing, that her husband being lately
dead, and the greatest part of her cattle destroyed
by the infectious distemper, she found herself
utterly incapable of paying the rent which was
due, or even of keeping the farm, unless he
would, out of his great goodness, be pleased to
give her some assistance, and allow her to sit free
for a twelvemonth to come. This intimation he
found means to convey by post from a market-town
adjoining to the farm, directed in the usual
stile to the cynic, who seeing it stamped with the
known marks, could not possibly suspect any imposition. 
Hackneyed as he was in the ways of life, and
steeled with his boasted stoicism, this epistle
threw him into such an agony of vexation, that a
double proportion of sowering was visible in his aspect,
when he was visited by the author, who 

having observed and followed the postman at a
proper distance, introduced a conversation upon
his own disappointments, in which, among other
circumstances of his own ill-luck, he told him,
that his patron's steward had desired to be excused
from paying the last quarter of his interest precisely
at the appointed term; for which reason,
he should be utterly void of cash; and therefore
requested, that Crabtree would accommodate
him with an hundred pieces out of his next remittance
from the country. 
This demand galled and perplexed the old man
to such a degree, that the muscles of his face assumed
a contraction most peculiarly virulent, and
exhibited the character of Diogenes with a most
lively expression: he knew that a confession of his
true situation would furnish Pickle with an opportunity
to make reprisals upon him, with intolerable
triumph; and that, by a downright refusal
to supply his wants, he would for ever forfeit
his friendship and esteem, and might provoke
him to take ample vengeance for his sordid behaviour,
by exposing him, in his native colours,
to the resentment of those whom he had so long
deceived. These considerations kept him some
time in a most rancorous state of suspence, which
Peregrine affected to misinterpret, by bidding
him freely declare his suspicion, if he did not think
it safe to comply with his request, and he would
make shift elsewhere. 
This seeming misconstruction increased the
torture of the misanthrope, who, with the utmost
irritation of feature, “Oons! (cried he)
what villainy have you noted in my conduct, that
you treat me like a rascally usurer?” Peregrine
very gravely replied, that the question needed no 

answer; “for (said he) had I considered you as
an usurer, I would have come with a security
under my arm; but, all evasion apart, will you
stead me? will you pleasure me? shall I have the
money?” “Would it were in your belly, with
a barrel of gunpowder! (exclaimed the enraged
cynic) since I must be excruciated, read that
plaguy paper!—'sblood! why didn't nature clap
a pair of long ears and a tail upon me, that I might
be a real ass, and champ thistles on some common,
independent of my fellow-creatures? 
Would I were a worm, that I might creep into
the earth, and thatch my habitation with a single
straw; or rather a wasp or a viper, that I might
make the rascally world feel my resentment: but
why do I talk of rascality? folly, folly is the
scourge of life! Give me a scoundrel (so he be a
sensible one) and I will put him in my heart of
hearts! but a fool is more mischievous than famine,
pestilence and war. The idiotical hag
that writes, or causes to be writ, this same letter,
has ruined her family, and broke her husband's
heart, by ignorance and mismanagement; 
and she imputes her calamity to providence with
a vengeance; and so I am defrauded of three
hundred pounds, the greatest part of which I owe
to tradesmen whom I have promised to pay this
very quarter. Pox upon her! I would she were
an horned beast, that the distemper might lay
hold on her. The beldame has the impudence
too (after she has brought me into this dilemma)
to solicit my assistance to stock the farm anew! 
Before God, I have a good mind to send her an
halter, and perhaps I might purchase another for
myself, but that I would not furnish food for
laughter to knaves and coxcombs.” 

Peregrine having perused the billet, and listened
to this ejaculation, replied with great composure,
that he was ashamed to see a man of his
years and pretensions to philosophy, so ruffled by
a trifle. “What signify all the boasted hardships
you have overcome (said he) and the shrewd observations
you pretend to have made on human
nature? Where is that stoical indifference you
affirm you have attained, if such a paultry disappointment
can disturb you in this manner? What
is the loss of three hundred pounds, compared
with the misfortunes which I myself have undergone
within these two years? Yet you will take
upon you to act the censor, and inveigh against
the impatience and impetuosity of youth, as if
you yourself had gained an absolute conquest over
all the passions of the heart. You was so kind as
to insult me t'other day in my affliction, by reproaching
me with indiscretion and misconduct; 
suppose I were now to retort the imputation, and
ask how a man of your profound sagacity could
leave your fortune at the discretion of ignorant
peasants? How could you be so blind as not to
foresee the necessity of repairs, together with the
danger of a bankruptcy, murrain, or thin crop? 
Why did not you convert your land into ready
money, and (as you have no connexions in life)
purchase an annuity, on which you might have
lived at your ease, without any fear of the consequence? 
Can't you, from the whole budget of
your philosophy, cull one apophthegm to console
you in this trivial mischance?” 
“Rot your rapidity! (said the cynic, half-choaked
with gall) if the cancer or the pox were
in your throat, I should not be thus tormented
with your tongue: and yet a magpye shall speak 

infinitely more to the purpose. Don't you know,
Mr. Wiseacre, that my case does not fall within
the province of philosophy? Had I been curtailed
of all my members, racked by the gout and
gravel, deprived of liberty, robbed of an only
child, or visited with the death of a dear friend
like you, philosophy might have contributed to
my consolation; but will philosophy pay my
debts, or free me from the burden of obligation
to a set of fellows whom I despise? Speak—pronounce
—demonstrate—or may heaven close your
mouth for ever!” 
“These are the comfortable fruits of your
misanthropy (answered the youth) your laudable
scheme of detaching yourself from the bonds of
society, and of moving in a superior sphere of
your own. Had not you been so peculiarly sage,
and intent upon laughing at mankind, you could
never have been disconcerted by such a pitiful inconvenience:
any friend would have accommodated
you with the sum in question. But now
the world may retort the laugh; for you stand
upon such an agreeable footing with your acquaintance,
that nothing could please them better
than an account of your having given disappointment
the slip, by the help of a noose properly
applied. This I mention by way of hint,
upon which I would have you chew the cud of
reflection; and should it come to that issue, I
will use my whole interest with the coroner, to
bring in his verdict Lunacy, that your carcase may
have christian burial.” 
So saying, he withdrew, very well satisfied
with the revenge he had taken, which operated
so violently upon Crabtree, that if it had not
been for the sole consideration mentioned above, 

he would, in all probability, have had recourse
to the remedy proposed. But his unwillingness
to oblige and entertain his fellow-creatures, hindered
him from practising that expedient, till, by
course of post, he was happily undeceived with
regard to the situation of his affairs; and that information
had such an effect upon him, that he
not only forgave our hero for the stratagem, which
he immediately ascribed to the right author, but
also made him a tender of his purse: so that matters,
for the present, were brought to an amicable
accommodation. 
Mean while, Peregrine never slackened in his
attendance upon the great; he never omitted to
appear upon every levee-day, employed his industry
and penetration in getting intelligence of
posts that were unfilled, and every day recommended
himself to the good offices of his patron,
who seemed to espouse his interest with great cordiality:
nevertheless, he was always too late in
his application, or the place he demanded chanced
to be out of the minister's gift. 
These intimations, tho' communicated in the
most warm professions of friendship and regard,
gave great umbrage to the young gentleman, who
considered them as the evasions of an insincere
courtier, and loudly complained of them as such
to his lordship, signifying, at the same time, an
intention to sell his mortgage for ready money,
which he would expend to the last farthing in
thwarting his honour, in the very first election
he should patronize. His lordship never wanted
a proper exhortation upon these occasions: he
did not now endeavour to pacify him with assurances
of the minister's favour, because he perceived
that these medicines had, by repeated use, 

lost their effect upon our adventurer, whose menaces
he now combated, by representing that the
minister's purse was heavier than that of Mr.
Pickle; that therefore, should he make a point
of opposing his interest, the youth must infallibly
fail in the contest: in which case he would find
himself utterly destitute of the means of subsistence,
and consequently precluded from all hope
of provision. 
This was an observation, the truth of which
our young gentleman could not pretend to doubt,
tho' it did not at all tend to the vindication of
his honour's conduct. Indeed Pickle began to
suspect the sincerity of his own patron, who, in
his opinion, had trifled with his impatience, and
even eluded, by sorry excuses, his desire of having
another private audience of the first mover. 
His lordship also began to be less accessible than
usual; and Peregrine had been obliged to dun
the steward with repeated demands, before he
could finger the last quarter of his interest. 
Alarmed by these considerations, he went and
consulted the nobleman whom he had obliged in
the affair of his son; and had the mortification
to hear but a very indifferent character of the
person in whom he had so long confided. This
new adviser, who (though a courtier) was a rival
of the other, gave our adventurer to understand,
that he had been leaning upon a broken reed; 
that his professed patron was a man of a shattered
fortune and decayed interest, which extended
no farther than a smile and a whisper; 
that for his own part, he should have been proud
of an opportunity to use his influence with the
minister in behalf of Mr. Pickle: “But, since
you have put yourself under the protection of 

another peer, (said he) whose connexions interfere
with mine, I cannot now espouse your
cause, without incurring the imputation of seducing
that nobleman's adherents; a charge
which, of all others, I would most carefully
avoid. However, I shall always be ready to assist
you with my private advice, as a specimen of
which, I now counsel you to insist upon having
another interview with Sir Steady Steerwell himself,
that you may in person explain your pretensions,
without any risque of being misrepresented; 
and endeavour, if possible, to draw him into some
particular promise, from which he cannot retract,
with any regard to his reputation: for general
profession is a necessary armour worn by all ministers
in their own defence, against the importunity
of those whom they will not befriend, and
would not disoblige.” 
This advice was so conformable to his own
sentiments, that our adventurer seized the first
opportunity to demand an hearing; and plainly
told his patron, that if he could not be indulged
with that favour, he should look upon his lordship's
influence to be very small, and his own
hopes to be altogether desperate; in which case,
he was resolved to dispose of the mortgage, purchase
an annuity, and live independant. 