

Is it not a shame to make two chapters
of what passed in going down one
pair of stairs? for we are got no farther
yet than to the first landing, and there
are fifteen more steps down to the bottom; 
and for aught I know, as my father
and my uncle Toby are in a talking
humour, there may be as many chapters
as steps;—let that be as it will, Sir, I
can no more help it than my destiny: — 
A sudden impulse comes across me— 
drop the curtain, Shandy—I drop it— 
Strike a line here across the paper, Tristram
—I strike it—and hey for a new chapter? 
The duce of any other rule have I to
govern myself by in this affair—and if I 

had one—as I do all things out of all
rule—I would twist it and tear it to
pieces, and throw it into the fire when I
had done—Am I warm? I am, and the
cause demands it—a pretty story! is a
man to follow rules—or rules to follow
him? 
Now this, you must know, being my
chapter upon chapters, which I promised
to write before I went to sleep, I thought
it meet to ease my conscience entirely
before I lay'd down, by telling the world
all I knew about the matter at once: Is
not this ten times better than to set out
dogmatically with a sententious parade of
wisdom, and telling the world a story of
a roasted horse—that chapters relieve the
mind—that they assist—or impose upon
the imagination—and that in a work of
this dramatic cast they are as necessary as 

the shifting of scenes—with fifty other
cold conceits, enough to extinguish the
fire which roasted him. —O! but to understand
this, which is a puff at the fire
of Diana's temple—you must read Longinus
—read away—if you are not a jot
the wiser by reading him the first time over
—never fear—read him again—Avicenna
and Licetus, read Aristotle's metaphysicks
forty times through a piece, and never
understood a single word. —But mark the
consequence—Avicenna turned out a desperate
writer at all kinds of writing— 
for he wrote books de omni scribili; and
for Licetus (Fortunio) though all the
world knows he was born a fœtus * , of 

no more than five inches and a half in
length, yet he grew to that astonishing
height in literature, as to write a book
with a title as long as himself—the
learned know I mean his Gonopsychanthropologia,
upon the origin of the human
soul. 

So much for my chapter upon chapters,
which I hold to be the best chapter
in my whole work; and take my word,
whoever reads it, is full as well employed,
as in picking straws. 