


Containing as great and as noble Instances
of human Greatness as are
to be met with in ancient or modern
History. Concluding with
some wholesome Hints to the gay
Part of Mankind. 
Wild no sooner parted from the
chaste Lætitia, than recollecting
that his Friend the Count was returned to
his Lodgings in the same House, he resolved
to visit him; for he was none of those
half-bred Fellows, who are ashamed to see
their Friends when they have plundered
and betrayed them: From which base and
pitiful Temper many monstrous Cruelties
have been transacted by Men, who have
sometimes carried their Modesty so far as to
the Murther, or utter Ruin of those against
whom their Consciences have suggested to
them, that they have committed some small 

Trespass, either by the debauching a Wife
or Daughter, belying or betraying, or some
other such trifling Instance. In our Hero
there was nothing not truly GREAT: He
could, without the least Abashment, drink
a Bottle with the Man who knew he had
the Moment before picked his Pocket; and,
when he had stript him of every thing he
had, never desired to do him any farther
Mischief; for he carried Good-nature to
that wonderful and uncommon Height,
that he never did a single Injury to Man or
Woman, by which he himself did not expect
to reap some Advantage. 
Our Hero found the captive Count
not basely lamenting his Fate, nor abandoning
himself to Despair, but, with due Resignation,
employing himself in preparing
several Packs of Cards for future Exploits. 
The Count, little suspecting that Wild
had been the sole Contriver of the Misfortune
which had befallen him, rose up, and
eagerly embraced him; and Wild, who
well knew the whole, returned his Embrace
with equal Warmth. They were 

no sooner seated than Wild took an Occasion,
from seeing the Cards lying on the
Table, to inveigh against Gaming, and,
with an usual and highly commendable
Freedom, after first exaggerating the distrest
Circumstances in which the Count
was then involved, imputed all his Misfortunes
to that cursed Itch of Play, which
he said, he concluded had brought his
present Confinement upon him, and must
unavoidably end in his Destruction. The
other, with great Alacrity, defended his favourite
Amusement (or rather Employment)
and having told him the great Success
he had after his unluckily quitting the
Room, acquainted him with the Accident
which followed, and which the Reader, as
well as Mr. Wild, hath had some Intimation
of before; adding, however, one Circumstance
not hitherto mentioned, viz.
that he had defended his Money with the
utmost Bravery, and had dangerously
wounded at least two of the three Men
who had attacked him. This Behaviour
Wild, who not only knew the extreme
Readiness with which the Booty had
been delivered, but also the constant Frigidity 

of the Count's Courage, highly applauded,
and wished he had been present to
assist him. The Count then proceeded to
animadvert on the Carelesness of the Watch,
and the Scandal it was to the Laws, that
People could not walk the Streets in Safety,
and, after expatiating some Time on that
Subject, he asked Mr. Wild if he ever saw
so prodigious a Run of Luck (for so he
chose to call his Winning, though he knew
Wild was well acquainted with his having
loaded Dice in his Pocket) the other answered,
it was indeed prodigious, and almost
sufficient to justify any Person, who
did not know him better, in suspecting his
fair Play. No Man, I believe, dares call
that in Question, replied he. No surely,
says Wild, you are well known to be a Man
of more Honour: But pray, Sir, continued
he, did the Rascals rob you of all? Every
Shilling, cries the other with an Oath; they
did not leave me a single Stake. 
While they were thus discoursing, Mr.
Snap, with a Gentleman who followed
him, introduced Mr. Bagshot into the Company. 
It seems Mr. Bagshot, immediately 

after his Separation from Mr. Wild, returned
to the Gaming-Table, where, he
having trusted to Fortune that Treasure
which he had procured by his Industry,
the faithless Goddess committed a Breach
of Trust, and sent Mr. Bagshot away with as
empty Pockets as are to be found in any
laced Coat in the Kingdom. Now as that
Gentleman was walking to a certain reputable
House or Shed in Covent-Garden
Market, he fortuned to meet with Mr.
Snap, who had just returned from conveying
the Count to his Lodgings, and was
then walking to and fro before the Gaming-House
Door; for you are to know, my
good Reader, if you have never been a
Man of Wit and Pleasure about Town,
that as the voracious Pike lieth snug under
some Weed before the Mouth of any of
those little Streams which discharge themselves
into a large River, waiting for the
small Fry which issue thereout; so hourly
before the Door or Mouth of these Gaming-Houses
doth Mr. Snap, or some other
Gentleman of his Occupation, attend the
issuing forth of the small Fry of young
Gentlemen, to whom they deliver little 

Slips of Parchment, containing Invitations
of the said Gentlemen to their Houses, together
with one Mr. John Doe, a Person
whose Company is in great Request. Mr.
Snap, among many others of these Billets,
happened to have one directed to Mr. Bagshot,
being at the Suit or Solicitation of
one Mrs. Anne Sample, Spinster, at
whose House the said Bagshot had lodged
several Months, and whence he had inadvertently
departed without taking a formal
Leave; on which Account Mrs. Anne had
taken this Method of speaking with him. 
Mr. Snap's House being now very full
of good Company, he was obliged to introduce
Mr. Bagshot into the Count's Apartment,
it being, as he said, the only Chamber
he had to lock up in. Mr. Wild no sooner
saw his Friend than he ran to embrace him,
and immediately presented him to the
Count, who received him with great Civility. 