


Something concerning Fireblood,
which will surprize; and somewhat
touching one of the Miss
Snaps, which will greatly concern
the Reader. 
However, notwithstanding all those
Censures abroad, and in Despight of
all his Misfortunes at home, Heartfree in
Newgate enjoyed a quiet, undisturbed Repose; 
while our Hero, nobly disdaining
Rest, lay sleepless all Night; partly from
the Apprehensions of Mrs. Heartfree's Return
before he had executed his Scheme; 
and partly from a Suspicion lest Fireblood
should betray him; of whole Infidelity he
had, nevertheless, no other Cause to maintain
any Fear, but from his knowing him
to be an accomplished Rascal, as the Vulgar 

term it, a complete GREAT Man in our
Language. And indeed, to confess the
Truth, these Doubts were not without some
Foundation; for the very same Thought
unluckily entred the Head of that noble
Youth, who considered, whether he might
not possibly sell himself for some Advantage
to the other Side, as he had yet no
Promise from Wild; but this was, by the
Sagacity of the latter, prevented in the
Morning with a Profusion of Promises,
which shewed him to be of the most generous
Temper in the World, with which
Fireblood was extremely well satisfied; and
made use of so many Protestations of his
Faithfulness, that he convinced Wild of
the Injustice of his Suspicions. 
At this Time an Accident happened,
which, though not immediately affecting
our Hero, we cannot avoid relating, as it
occasioned great Confusion in his Family,
as well as in the Family of Snap. It is indeed
a Calamity highly to be lamented,
when it stains untainted Blood, and happens
to an honourable House. An Injury never
to be repaired. A Blot never to be wiped 

out. A Sore never to be healed. To detain
my Reader no longer: Miss Theodosia Snap
was now safely delivered of a Male-Infant,
the Product of an Amour which that beautiful
(O that I could say, virtuous) Creature
had with the Count. 
Mr. Wild and his Lady were at Breakfast,
when Mr. Snap, with all the Agonies
of Despair both in his Voice and Countenance,
brought them this melancholy
News. Our Hero, who had (as we have
said) wonderful Good-nature when his
Greatness or Interest was not concerned,
instead of reviling his Sister-in-Law,
asked with a Smile: “Who was the Father?” 
But the chaste Lætitia, we repeat
the chaste, for well did she now deserve
that Epithet; received it in another
Manner. She fell into the utmost Fury at
the Relation, reviled her Sister in the bitterest
Terms, and vowed she would never
see nor speak to her more. Then burst
into Tears, and lamented over her Father,
that such a Dishonour should ever happen
to him and herself. At length she fell
severely on her Husband, for the light 

Treatment which he gave this fatal Accident. 
She told him, he was unworthy of
the Honour he enjoyed, of marrying into
a chaste Family. That she looked on it
as an Affront to her Virtue. That if he
had married one of the naughty Hussies of
the Town, he could not have behaved to
her in a worse Manner. She concluded
with desiring her Father to make an Example
of the Slut, and turn her out of
Doors; for that she would not otherwise
enter his House, being resolved never to set
her Foot within the same Threshold with
the Trollop, whom she detested so much
the more, because (which was perhaps
true) she was her own Sister. 
So violent, and indeed so outragious was
this chaste Lady's Love of Virtue, that she
could not forgive a single Slip (indeed the
only one Theodosia had ever made) in her
own Sister, in a Sister who loved her, and
to whom she owed a thousand Obligations. 
Perhaps the Severity of Mr. Snap,
who greatly felt the Injury done to the Honour 

of his Family, would have relented,
had not the Parish-Officers been extremely
pressing on this Occasion, and, for want of
Security, conveyed the unhappy young Lady
to a Place, the Name of which, for the
Honour of the Snaps, to whom our Hero
was so nearly allied, we bury in eternal Oblivion; 
where she suffered so much Correction
for her Crime, that the good-natured
Reader of the Male kind may be inclined
to compassionate her, at least to imagine
she was sufficiently punished for a
Fault, which, with Submission to the
chaste Lætitia, and all other strictly virtuous
Ladies, it should be either less criminal
in a Woman to commit, or more so
in a Man to solicit her to it. 
But to return to our Hero, who was a
living and strong Instance, that human
Greatness and Happiness are not always
inseparable. He was under a continual
Alarm of Frights, and Fears, and Jealousies. 
He thought every Man he beheld
wore a Knife for his Throat, and a Pair of
Scissars for his Purse. As for his own
Gang particularly, he was throughly convinced 

there was not a single Man amongst
them, who would not, for the Value of
five Shillings, bring him to the Gallows. 
These Apprehensions so constantly broke his
Rest, and kept him so assiduously on his
Guard, to frustrate and circumvent any Designs
which might be forming against him; 
that his Condition, to any other than the
glorious Eye of Ambition, might seem rather
deplorable, than the Object of Envy
or Desire. 