


Julian's Adventures in the Post of a
Soldier. 
‘I Was born at Caen in Normandy. My
Mother's Name was Matilda; as for
my Father, I am not so certain: for the
good Woman on her Death-Bed assured me,
she herself could bring her Guess to no greater
Certainty, than to five of Duke William's
Captains. When I was no more than Thirteen
(being indeed a surprizing stout Boy of
my Age) I enlisted into the Army of Duke 

William, afterwards known by the Name
of William the Conqueror; landed with
him at Pemesey, or Pemsey in Sussex, and
was present at the famous Battle of Hastings. 
‘At the first Onset, it was impossible to
describe my Consternation, which was
heightened by the Fall of two Soldiers
who stood by me; but this soon abated,
and by degrees as my Blood grew warm, I
thought no more of my own Safety, but
fell on the Enemy with great Fury, and did
a good deal of Execution; till unhappily I
received a Wound in my Thigh, which
rendered me unable to stand any longer, so
that I now lay among the Dead, and was
constantly exposed to the Danger of being
trampled to death; as well by my Fellow-Soldiers
as by the Enemy. However, I
had the fortune to escape it, and continued
the remaining part of the Day, and the
Night following, on the Ground. 
‘The next Morning, the Duke sending
out Parties to bring off the wounded, I
was found almost expiring with Loss of
Blood; notwithstanding which, as immediate 

Care was taken to dress my Wounds. 
Youth and a robust Constitution stood my
Friends, and I recovered, after a long and
tedious Indisposition, and was again able to
use my Limbs and do my Duty. 
‘As soon as Dover was taken, I was conveyed
thither with all the rest of the sick
and wounded. Here I recovered of my
Wound: but fell afterwards into a violent
Flux, which when it departed, left me so
weak, that it was long before I could regain
my Strength. And what most afflicted
me was, that during my whole Illness,
when I languished under Want as well as
Sickness, I had daily the mortification to
see and hear the Riots and Excess of my
Fellow-Soldiers, who had happily escaped
safe from the Battle. 
‘I Was no sooner well, than I was ordered
into Garrison at Dover Castle. The Officers
here fared very indifferently; but the
private Men much worse. We had great
Scarcity of Provisions, and what was yet
more intolerable, were so closely confined for
want of Room (four of us being obliged 

to lie on the same Bundle of Straw) that
many died, and most sickened. 
‘Here I had remained about four Months
when one Night we were alarmed with the
Arrival of the Earl of Boulogne, who had
come over privily from France, and endeavoured
to surprize the Castle. The Design
proved ineffectual: for the Garrison making
a brisk Sally, most of his Men were tumbled
down the Precipice, and he returned with
a very few back to France. In this Action
however, I had the misfortune to come off
with a broken Arm; it was so shattered,
that besides a great deal of Pain and Misery,
which I endured in my Cure, I was disabled
for upwards of three Months. 
‘Soon after my Recovery, I had contracted
an Amour with a young Woman, whose
Parents lived near the Garrison, and were
in much better Circumstances than I had
reason to expect should give their Consent
to the Match. However, as she was extremely
fond of me, (as I was indeed distractedly
enamoured of her) they were 

prevailed on to comply with her Desires, and
the Day was fixed for our Marriage. 
‘On the Evening preceding, while I was
exulting with the eager Expectation of the
Happiness I was the next Day to enjoy,
received Orders to march early in the Morning
towards Windsor, where a large Army
was to be formed, at the Head of which the
King intended to march into the West. Any
Person who hath ever been in love, may
easily imagine what I felt in my Mind, on
receiving those Orders; and what still heightened
my Torments was, that the commanding
Officer would not permit any one
to go out of the Garrison that Evening; 
so that I had not even an Opportunity of
taking Leave of my Beloved. 
‘The Morning came, which was to have
put me in the Possession of my Wishes; but
alas! the Scene was now changed, and all
the Hopes which I had raised, were now
so many Ghosts to haunt, and Furies to torment
me. 

‘It was now the midst of Winter, and very
severe Weather for the Season; when we
were obliged to make very long and fatiguing
Marches, in which we suffered all
the Inconveniences of Cold and Hunger. 
The Night in which I expected to riot in
the Arms of my beloved Mistress, I was
obliged to take up with a Lodging on the
Ground, exposed to the Inclemencies of a
rigid Frost; nor could I obtain the least
Comfort of Sleep, which shunned me as
its Enemy. In short, the Horrors of that
Night are not to be described, or perhaps
imagined. They made such an Impression
on my Soul, that I was forced to be dipped
three Times in the River Lethe, to prevent
my remembering it in the Characters
which I afterwards performed in the Flesh.’ 
Here I interrupted Julian for the first
time, and told him, no such dipping had
happened to me in my Voyage from one
World to the other: but he satisfied me by
saying, ‘That this only happened to those
Spirits which returned into the Flesh, in
order to prevent that Reminiscence which 

Plato mentions, and which would otherwise
cause great Confusion in the other
World.’ 
He then proceeded as follows: ‘We continued
a very laborious March to Exeter,
which we were ordered to besiege. The
Town soon surrendered, and his Majesty
built a Castle there, which he garrisoned
with his Normans, and unhappily I had
the misfortune to be one of the Number. 
‘Here we were confined closer than I
had been at Dover; for as the Citizens were
extremely disaffected, we were never suffered
to go without the Walls of the Castle; 
nor indeed could we, unless in large Bodies,
without the utmost Danger. We were
likewise kept to continual Duty, nor could
any Sollicitations prevail with the Commanding
Officer to give me a Month's Absence
to visit my Love, from whom I had
no Opportunity of hearing in all my long
Absence. 
‘However, in the Spring, the People
being more quiet, and another Officer 

of a gentler Temper, succeeding to the
principal Command, I obtained Leave to
go to Dover: but alas! what Comfort did
my long Journey bring me? I found the Parents
of my Darling in the utmost Misery at
her Loss: for she had died about a Week
before my Arrival of a Consumption, which
they imputed to her pining at my sudden
Departure. 
‘I Now fell into the most violent and almost
raving Fit of Despair. I cursed my
self, the King, and the whole World,
which no longer seemed to have any Delight
for me. I threw my self on the Grave of
my deceased Love, and lay there without
any kind of Sustenance for two whole Days. 
At last Hunger, together with the Persuasions
of some People who took pity on me,
prevailed with me to quit that Situation, and
refresh my self with Food. They then persuaded
me to return to my Post, and abandon
a Place where almost every Object I saw, recalled
Ideas to my Mind, which, as they said,
I should endeavour with my utmost Force
to expel from it. This Advice at length succeeded; 
the rather, as the Father and Mother 

of my Beloved refused to see me, looking
on me as the innocent but certain Cause
of the Death of their only Child. 
‘The Loss of one we tenderly love, as
it is one of the most bitter and biting Evils
which attends human Life, so it wants the
Lenitive which palliates and softens every
other Calamity; I mean that great Reliever,
Hope. No Man can be so totally undone,
but that he may still cherish Expectation:
but this deprives us of all such Comfort,
nor can any thing but Time alone lessen it. 
This however, in most Minds, is sure to
work a slow but effectual Remedy; so did
it in mine: for within a Twelvemonth, I
was entirely reconciled to my Fortune, and
soon after absolutely forgot the Object of a
Passion from which I had promised my self
such extreme Happiness, and in the Disappointment
of which I had experienced
such inconceivable Misery. 
‘At the Expiration of the Month, I returned
to my Garrison at Exeter; where I
was no sooner arrived, than I was ordered
to march into the North, to oppose a Force 

there levied by the Earls of Chester and
Northumberland. We came to York, where
his Majesty pardoned the Heads of the Rebels,
and very severely punished some who
were less guilty. It was particularly my
Lot to be ordered to seize a poor Man, who
had never been out of his House, and convey
him to Prison. I detested this Barbarity,
yet was obliged to execute it; nay,
though no Reward would have bribed me
in a private Capacity to have acted such a
Part, yet so much Sanctity is there in the
Commands of a Monarch, or General to a
Soldier, that I performed it without Reluctance,
nor had the Tears of his Wife and
Family any Prevalence with me. 
‘But this, which was a very small piece
of Mischief in comparison with many of
my Barbarities afterwards, was however
the only one which ever gave me any Uneasiness:
for when the King led us afterward
into Northumberland to revenge those
People's having joined with Osborn the Dane
in his Invasion, and Orders were given us to
commit what Ravages we could, I was forward
in fulfilling them, and among some 

lesser Cruelties (I remember it yet with
Sorrow) I ravished a Woman, murdered a
little Infant playing in her Lap, and then
burnt her House. In short, for I have no
pleasure in this part of my Relation, I had
my share in all the Cruelties exercised on
those poor Wretches; which were so grievous,
that for sixty Miles together, between
York and Durham, not a single House,
Church, or any other public or private
Edifice was left standing. 
‘We had pretty well devoured the Country,
when we were ordered to march to the
Isle of Ely, to oppose Hereward, a bold and
stout Soldier, who had under him a very
large Body of Rebels, who had the Impudence
to rise against their King and Conqueror
(I talk now in the same Style I did
then) in defence of their Liberties, as they
called them. These were soon subdued:
but as I happened (more to my Glory than
my Comfort) to be posted in that part
through which Hereward cut his way, I
received a dreadful Cut on the Forehead, 

a second on the Shoulder, and was run
through the Body with a Pike. 
‘I Languished a long time with these
Wounds, which made me incapable of attending
the King into Scotland. However, I
was able to go over with him afterwards into
Normandy, in his Expedition against Philip,
who had taken the Opportunity of the
Troubles in England, to invade that Province. 
Those few Normans who had survived their
Wounds, and had remained in the Isle
of Ely, were all of our Nation who went,
the rest of his Army being all composed of
English. In a Skirmish near the Town of
Mans, my Leg was broke, and so shattered
that it was forced to be cut off. 
‘I Was now disabled for serving longer
in the Army, and accordingly being discharged
from the Service, I retired to the
Place of my Nativity, where in extreme
Poverty, and frequent bad Health from
the many Wounds I had received, I dragged
on a miserable Life to the Age of Sixty-three; 
my only Pleasure being to recount 

the Feats of my Youth, in which Narratives
I generally exceeded the Truth. 
‘It would be tedious and unpleasant to
recount to you the several Miseries I suffered
after my Return to Caen; let it suffice,
they were so terrible, that they induced
Minos to compassionate me, and, notwithstanding
the Barbarities I had been
guilty of in Northumberland, to suffer me
to go once more back to Earth.’ 