


Julian appears in the Character of
a Beggar. 
‘I Now returned to Rome, and was born
into a very poor and numerous Family,
which, to be honest with you, procured its
Livelihood by Begging. This, if you was
never yourself of the Calling, you do not
know, I suppose, to be as regular a Trade
as any other; to have its several Rules and
Secrets, or Mysteries, which to learn require
perhaps as tedious an Apprenticeship
as those of any Craft whatever. 
‘The first thing we are taught is the Countenance
miserable. This indeed Nature makes
much easier to some than others: but there 

are none who cannot accomplish it, if they
begin early enough in Youth, and before
the Muscles are grown too stubborn. 
‘The second Thing is, the Voice lamentable. 
In this Qualification too, Nature
must have her share in producing the most
consummate Excellence: however, Art will
here, as in every other Instance, go a great
way with Industry and Application, even
without the Assistance of Genius; especially
if the Student begins young. 
‘There are many other Instructions: but
these are the most considerable. The Women
are taught one Practice more than the
Men; for they are instructed in the Art
of Crying, that is, to have their Tears ready
on all Occasions: but this is attained
very easily by most. Some indeed arrive at
the utmost Perfection in this Art with incredible
Facility. 
‘No Profession requires a deeper Insight
into human Nature, than the Beggar's. Their
Knowledge of the Passions of Men is so extensive,
that I have often thought, it would 

be of no little service to a Politician to
have his Education among them. Nay,
there is a much greater Analogy between
these two Characters than is imagined: for
both concur in their first and grand Principle,
it being equally their Business to delude
and impose on Mankind. It must be
confest, that they differ widely in the Degree
of Advantage, which they make by
their Deceit: for, whereas the Beggar is
contented with a little, the Politician leaves
but a little behind. 
‘A Very great English Philosopher hath
remarked our Policy, in taking Care never
to address any one with a Title inferiour to
what he really claims. My Father was of
the same Opinion: for I remember when I
was a Boy, the Pope happening to pass by,
I attended him with Pray Sir; for God's
sake, Sir; for the Lord's sake, Sir. —To which
he answered gravely, Sirrah, Sirrah, you ought
to be whipt, for taking the Lord's Name in
vain; and in vain it was indeed, for he gave
me nothing. My Father over-hearing this,
took his Advice and whipt me very severely. 
While I was under Correction, I promised 

often never to take the Lord's Name in vain
any more. My Father then said, Child, I
do not whip you for taking his Name in
vain: I whip you for not calling the Pope
his Holiness. 
‘If all Men were so wise and good to follow
the Clergy's Example, the Nusance of
Beggars would soon be removed. I do not remember
to have been above twice relieved by
them during my whole State of Beggary. Once
was by a very well-looking Man, who gave
me a small Piece of Silver, and declared, he
had given me more than he had left himself; 
the other was by a spruce young Fellow,
who had that very day first put on
his Robes, whom I attended with Pray,
Reverend Sir, good Reverend Sir, consider
your Cloth. He answered, I do, Child, consider
my Office, and I hope all of our Cloth do
the same. He then threw down some Money,
and strutted off with great Dignity. 
‘With the Women, I had one general
Formulary: Sweet pretty Lady, God bless
your Ladyship, God bless your handsome Face. 
This generally succeeded; but I observed, the 

uglier the Woman was, the surer I was of
Success. 
‘It was a constant Maxim among us,
that the greater Retinue any one travelled
with, the less Expectation we might promise
ourselves from them; but whenever we saw
a Vehicle with a single, or no Servant, we
imagined our Booty sure, and were seldom
deceived. 
‘We observed great Difference introduced
by Time and Circumstance in the
same Person: for instance, a losing Gamester
is sometimes generous; but from a
Winner, you will as easily obtain his Soul, as
a single Groat. A Lawyer travelling from
his Country Seat to his Clients at Rome, and
a Physician going to visit a Patient, were always
worth asking: but the same on their
Return were (according to our Cant Phrase)
untouchable. 
‘The most general, and indeed, the truest
Maxim among us, was, That those who
possess'd the least were always the readiest to
give. The chief Art of a Beggarman is
therefore to discern the Rich from the Poor, 

which, tho' it be only distinguishing Substance
from Shadow, is by no means attainable
without a pretty good Capacity,
and a vast Degree of Attention: for these
two are eternally industrious in endeavouring
to counterfeit each other. In this Deceit,
the poor Man is more heartily in earnest
to deceive you, than the Rich; who amidst
all the Emblems of Poverty which he puts
on, still permits some mark of his Wealth
to strike the Eye. Thus, while his Apparel
is not worth a Groat, his Finger wears
a Ring of Value, or his Pocket a Gold
Watch. In a word, he seems rather to affect
Poverty to insult, than impose on you. 
Now the poor Man, on the contrary, is very
sincere in his Desire of passing for rich; 
but the Eagerness of this Desire, hurries
him to over-act his Part, and he betrays
himself, as one who is drunk by his overacted
Sobriety. Thus, instead of being
attended by one Servant well mounted, he
will have two; and not being able to purchase
or maintain a second Horse of Value,
one of his Servants at least is mounted on a
hired Rascallion. He is not contented to go
plain and neat in his Clothes; he therefore 

claps on some taudry Ornament, and what
he adds to the Fineness of his Vestment,
he detracts from the Fineness of his Linnen. 
Without descending into more minute Particulars,
I believe I may assert it as an Axiom
of indubitable Truth, That whoever
shews you he is either in himself, or his
Equipage, as gaudy as he can, convinces you
he is more so than he can afford. Now
whenever a Man's Expence exceeds his Income,
he is indifferent in the Degree; we had
therefore nothing more to do with such,
than to flatter them with their Wealth and
Splendor, and were always certain of Success. 
‘There is, indeed, one kind of rich
Man, who is commonly more liberal, namely,
where Riches surprize him as it were,
in the midst of Poverty and Distress, the
Consequence of which is, I own, sometimes
excessive Avarice; but oftner extreme
Prodigality. I remember one of these, who
having received a pretty large Sum of Money,
gave me, when I begged an Obolus,
a whole Talent; on which his Friend having
reproved him, he answered with an Oath,
Why not? Have I not fifty left? 

‘The Life of a Beggar, if Men estimated
things by their real Essence, and not
by their outward false Appearance, would be,
perhaps, a more desirable Situation than
any of those, which Ambition persuades us
with such Difficulty, Danger, and often
Villany, to aspire to. The Wants of a Beggar
are commonly as chimerical as the Abundance
of a Nobleman; for besides Vanity,
which a judicious Beggar will always
apply to with wonderful Efficacy, there are in
reality very few Natures so hardened, as not
to compassionate Poverty and Distress,
when the Predominancy of some other
Passion doth not prevent them. 
‘There is one Happiness which attends
Money got with ease, namely, that it is never
hoarded; otherwise, as we have frequent
Opportunities of growing rich, that Canker
Care might prey on our Quiet, as it doth on
others: but our Money Stock we spend as
fast as we acquire it; usually at least, for
I speak not without exception; thus it
gives us mirth only, and no trouble. Indeed,
the Luxury of our Lives might introduce
Diseases, did not our daily Exercise prevent
them. This gives us Appetite and Relish 

for our Dainties, and at the same time,
an Antidote against the evil Effects, which
Sloth, united with Luxury, induces on the
Habit of a human Body. Our Women we
enjoy with Extasies, at least equal to what
the greatest Men feel in their Embraces. 
I can, I am assured, say of myself, that no
Mortal could reap more perfect Happiness
from the tender Passion, than my Fortune
had decreed me. I married a charming
young Woman for Love, she was the Daughter
of a neighbouring Beggar, who with an
Improvidence too often seen, spent a very
large Income, which he procured by his
Profession, so that he was able to give her
no Fortune down; however, at his Death,
he left her a very well-accustomed Begging-Hut,
situated on the side of a steep Hill,
where Travellers could not immediately escape
from us, and a Garden adjoining, being
the 28th Part of an Acre, well planted. She
made the best of Wives, bore me nineteen
Children, and never failed, unless on her
Lying-in, which generally lasted three
Days, to get my Supper ready, against my
return home in an Evening; this being my
favourite Meal, and at which I, as well as 

my whole Family, greatly enjoyed ourselves; 
the principal Subject of our Discourse, being
generally the Boons we had that day obtained,
on which occasions laughing at the Folly
of the Donors, made no inconsiderable Part
of the Entertainment: for whatever might
be their Motive for giving, we constantly imputed
our Success to our having flattered
their Vanity, or over-reached their Understanding. 
‘But, perhaps, I have dwelt too long
on this Character; I shall conclude therefore
with telling you, that after a Life of 102 Years
Continuance, during all which I had never
known any Sickness or Infirmity, but that
which Old Age necessarily induced, I at last,
without the least Pain, went out like the
Snuff of a Candle. 
‘Minos having heard my History, bid
me compute, if I could, how many Lyes
I had told in my Life. As we are here by a
certain fated Necessity, obliged to confine
ourselves to Truth, I answered, I believed
about 50,000,000. He then replyed with
a Frown, Can such a Wretch conceive any 

Hopes of entering Elysium? I immediately
turned about, and, upon the whole, was rejoiced
at his not calling me back.’ 