


Mr. Wild's first Entrance into the
World. His Acquaintance with
Count La Ruse. 
An Accident happened soon after his
Arrival in Town, which almost saved
him his whole Labour on this Head,
and provided Master Wild a better Tutor
than any Care or Expence could have furnished
him with. The old Gentleman, it
seems, was a Follower of the Fortunes
of Mr. Snap, Son of Mr. Geoffry Snap,
whom we have before mentioned to have
enjoyed a reputable Office under the Sheriff
of London and Middlesex, whose Daughter,
the Sister of this Gentleman, had inter-married
with the Wilds. Mr. Snap, being
thereto well warranted, had laid violent
Hands on, or, as the Vulgar express it, arrested
one Count La Ruse, a Man of considerable
Figure in those Days, and had
confined him to his own House, till he
could find two Seconds who would in a 

formal Manner give their Words that the
Count should, at a certain Day and Place
appointed, answer all that one Thomas Thimble
a Taylor had to say to him; which Thomas
Thimble, it seems, alledged that the Count
had, according to the Law of the Realm,
made over his Body to him as a Security
for some Suits of Cloaths to him delivered
by the said Thomas Thimble. Now, as the
Count, tho' perfectly a Man of Honour,
could not immediately find these Seconds,
he was obliged for some Time to reside at
Mr. Snap's House; for it seems the Law
of the Land is, that whoever owes another
10l. may be on the Oath of that Person,
immediately taken up and carried away
from his own House and Family, and kept
abroad till he is made to owe 50l. whether
he will or no; for which he is, perhaps,
afterwards obliged to lie in Gaol; and
all this without any Trial had, or any
other Evidence of the Debt than the abovesaid
Oath, which if untrue, as it often
happens, you have no Remedy against the
Perjurer; he was, forsooth! mistaken. 

But tho' Mr. Snap would not (as perhaps
by the nice Rules of Honour he was
obliged) discharge the Count on his Parole; 
yet did he not (as by the strict Rules
of Law he was enabled) confine him
to his Chamber. The Count had his Liberty
of the whole House, and Mr. Snap
using only the Precaution of keeping his
Doors well lock'd and barr'd, took his
Prisoner's Word that he would not go
out. 
Mr. Snap had by his Second Lady two
Daughters, who were now in the Bloom
of their Youth and Beauty. These young
Ladies, like Damsels in Romance, compassionated
the captive Count, and endeavoured
by all Means to make his Confinement
less irksome to him; which, tho' they were
both very beautiful, they could not attain
by any other Way so effectually, as by
engaging with him at Cards, in which
Contentions, as will appear hereafter, the
Count was greatly skilful. 

As Whisk and Swabbers was the Game
then in the chief Vogue, they were oblig'd to
look for a fourth Person, in order to make
up their Parties. Mr. Snap himself would
sometimes relax his Mind, from the violent
Fatigues of his Employment, by these
Recreations; and sometimes a neighbouring
young Gentleman, or Lady, came in to
their Assistance: But the most frequent
Guest was young Master Wild, who
had been educated from his Infancy with
the Miss Snaps, and was, by all the Neighbours,
allotted for the Husband of Miss
Tishy, or Lætitia, the younger of the two; 
for though, being his Cousin-German,
she was perhaps, in the Eye of a strict Conscience,
somewhat too nearly related to
him; yet the old People on both Sides, tho'
sufficiently scrupulous in nice Matters, agreed
to overlook this Objection. 
Men of great Genius as easily discover
one another as Free-Masons can. It was
therefore no Wonder that the Count soon
conceived an Inclination to an Intimacy
with our young Hero, whose vast Abilities 

could not be concealed from one of the
Count's Discernment; for though this latter
was so expert at his Cards, that he
was proverbially said, to play the whole
Game, he was no Match for Master Wild,
who, inexperienced as he was, notwithstanding
all the Art, the Dexterity, and
often the Fortune of his Adversary, never
failed to send him away from the Table
with less in his Pocket than he brought to
it; for indeed Langfanger himself could
not have extracted a Purse with more Ingenuity
than our young Hero. 
His Hands made frequent Visits to the
Count's Pocket, before the latter had entertained
any Suspicion of him, imputing the
several Losses he sustained rather to the innocent
and sprightly Frolick of Miss Doshy, with
which, as she indulged him with little innocent
Freedoms about her Person in Return,
he thought himself obliged to be contented; 
but one Night, when Wild imagined the
Count asleep, he made so unguarded an
Attack upon him, that the other caught
him in the Fact: However, he did not
think proper to acquaint him with the 

Discovery he had made; but, preventing
him from any Booty at that Time, he only
took Care for the future to button his
Pockets, and pack the Cards with double
Industry. 
So far was this Detection from causing
any Quarrel between these two Prigs,
that these and many other such Instances of
his Ingenuity, operated so violently on the
Count, that, notwithstanding the Disparity
which Age, Title, and above all Dress,
had set between them, he resolved to enter
into an Acquaintance, which soon produced
a perfect Intimacy, and that a Friendship
which had a longer Duration than is
common to that Passion between Persons,
who only propose to themselves the common
Advantage of eating, drinking, whoring,
or borrowing Money; which Ends as
they soon fail, so doth the Friendship
founded upon them. 