


A horrible Uproar in the Gate. 
But however great an Idea the Reader
may hence conceive of this Uproar,
he will think the Occasion more than
adequate to it, when he is informed, that
our Hero, (I blush to name it) had discovered
an Injury done to his Honour, and
that in the tenderest Point—In a Word,
Reader, (for thou must know it, tho' it
give thee the greatest Horror imaginable)
he had caught Fireblood in the Arms of his
lovely Lætitia. 
As the generous Bull, who having long
depastured among a Number of Cows, and
thence contracted an Opinion, that these
Cows are all his own Property, if he beholds
another Bull bestride a Cow within
his Walks, he roars aloud, and threatens
instant Vengeance with his Horns, till the
whole Parish are alarmed with his bellowing. 
Not with less Noise, nor less dreadful
Menaces did the Fury of Wild burst 

forth, and terrify the whole Gate. Long
time did Rage render his Voice inarticulate
to the Hearer; as when, at a visiting
Day, fifteen or sixteen, or perhaps twice as
many Females of delicate but shrill Pipes,
ejaculate all at once on different Subjects,
all is Sound only, the Harmony entirely
melodious indeed, but conveys no Idea to
our Ears; but at length, when Reason began
to get the Better of his Passion, which
latter being deserted by his Breath, began a
little to retreat, the following Accents leapt
over the Hedge of his Teeth, or rather the
Ditch of his Gums, whence those Hedgestakes
had by a Pattin been displaced in Battle
with an Amazon of Drury. 
*  
“—Man of Honour! doth this become
a Friend? Could I have expected such a
Breach of all the Laws of Honour from
thee, whom I had taught to walk
in its Paths? Hadst thou chosen any
other Way to injure my Confidence, I
could have forgiven it; but this is a Stab
in the tenderest Part, a Wound never to 

be healed, an Injury never to be repaired: 
For it is not only the Loss of an agreeable
Companion, of the Affection of
a Wife, dearer to my Soul than Life itself,
it is not this Loss alone I lament: 
This Loss is accompanied with Disgrace,
and with Dishonour. The Blood of the
Wild's, which hath run with such uninterrupted
Purity through so many Generations,
this Blood is fouled, is contaminated: 
Hence flow my Tears, hence arises
my Grief. This is the Injury never
to be redressed, nor never to be with
Honour forgiven. My &wblank; in a Bandbox,
answered Fireblood, here is a Noise about
your Honour: If the Mischief done to
your Blood, be all you complain of, I am
sure you complain of nothing; for my
Blood is as good as yours. You have
no Conception, replied Wild, of the tenderness
of Honour; you know not how
nice and delicate it is in both Sexes; so delicate,
that the least breath of Air which
rudely blows on it, destroys it. I will prove
from your own Words, says, Fireblood,
I have not wronged your Honour. Have
you not often told me, that the Honour 

of a Man consisted in receiving no Affront
from his own Sex, and that of a Woman
in receiving no Kindness from ours. Now,
Sir, if I have given you no Affront, how
have I injured your Honour? But doth
not every thing, cried Wild, of the Wife
belong to the Husband? A married Man
therefore hath his Wife's Honour as well
as his own, and by injuring her's you injure
his. How cruelly you have hurt me
in this tender Part, I need not repeat, the
whole Gate knows it, and the World
shall. I will apply to Doctor's Commons
for my Redress against her, I will shake
off as much of my Dishonour as I can by
parting with her; and as for you, expect to
hear of me in Westminster-Hall; the modern
Method of repairing these Breaches,
and of resenting this Affront. D&wblank;n
your Eyes, cries Fireblood, I fear you not,
nor do I believe a Word you say. Nay,
if you affront me personally, says, Wild,
another Sort of Resentment is prescribed. 
At which Word, advancing to Fireblood,
he presented him with a Box on the Ear,
which the Youth immediately returned,
and now our Hero and his Friend fell to 

Boxing, tho' with some Difficulty, both
being incumbered with the Chains which
they wore between their Legs: A few
Blows past on both Sides, before the
Gentlemen, who stood by, stept in and
parted the Combatants; and now both
Parties having whisper'd each other, that,
if they out-lived the ensuing Sessions and
escaped the Tree, the one should give and
the other should receive Satisfaction in
single Combat; they separated, and the
Gate soon recovered its former Tranquillity.” 
Mrs. Heartfree was then desired, by the
Justice and her Husband both, to conclude
her Story, which she did in the Words of
the next Chapter. 