


The Conclusion of the Boat Adventure,
and the End of the second
Book. 
Our Hero past the Remainder of the
Evening, the Night, and the next
Day, in a Condition not much to be envied
by any Passion of the human Mind, unless
by Ambition; which, provided it can only
entertain itself with the most distant Music
of Fame's Trumpet, can disdain all the Pleasures
of the Sensualist, and those more solemn,
tho' quieter Comforts, which a good Conscience
suggests to a Christian Philosopher. 
He spent his Time in Contemplation,
that is to say, in Blaspheming, cursing, and
sometimes singing and whistling. At last, 

when Cold and Hunger had almost subdued
his native Fierceness, it being a good
deal past Midnight, and extremely dark,
he thought he beheld a Light at a Distance,
which the Cloudiness of the Sky prevented
his mistaking for a Star; This Light, however,
did not seem to approach him, at least
by such imperceptible Degrees, that it gave
him very little Comfort, and at length totally
forsook him. He then renewed his
Contemplation as before, in which he continued
till the Day began to break; when,
to his inexpressible Delight, he beheld a Sail
at a very little Distance, and which luckily
seemed to be making towards him. He was
likewise soon espied by those in the Vessel,
who wanted no Signals to inform them of
his Distress, and as it was almost a Calm,
and their Course lay within five hundred
Yards of him, they hoisted out their Boat
and fetched him aboard. 
The Captain of this Ship was a French-Man; 
she was laden with Deal from Norway,
and had been extremely shattered in
the late Storm. This Captain was of that
kind of Men, who are actuated by a general 

Humanity, and whose Compassion can
be raised by the Distress of a Fellow-Creature,
though of a Nation whose King
had quarrelled with the Monarch of their
own. He therefore commiserating the
Circumstances of Wild, who had drest up
a Story proper to impose on such a silly
Fellow; told him, that, as himself well
knew, he must be a Prisoner on his Arrival
in France, but that he would endeavour to
procure his Redemption; for which our
Hero greatly thanked him. But as they
were making very slow Sail (for they had
lost their Main-mast in the Storm) Wild
saw a little Vessel at a Distance, they being
within a few Legues of the English Shore,
which, on Enquiry, he was informed was
probably an English Fishing-Boat. And, it
being then perfectly calm, he promised,
that if they would accommodate him with
an Oar, he could get within Reach of the
Boat, at least near enough to make Signals
to her; and he preferred any Risque to the
certain Fate of being a Prisoner. As his
Courage was somewhat restored by the
Provisions (especially Brandy) with which
the Frenchman had supplied him, he was 

so earnest in his Entreaties, that the Captain,
after many Persuasions, at length
complied; and he was furnished with an
Oar, with some Bread, Pork, and a Bottle
of Brandy. Then, taking Leave of his
Preservers, he again betook himself to his
Boat, and rowed so heartily, that he soon
came within the Sight of the Fisherman,
who immediately made towards him, and
took him aboard. 
No sooner was Wild got safe on Board
the Fisherman, than he begged him to
make the utmost Speed into Deal; for that
the Vessel, which was still in Sight, was a
distressed Frenchman, bound for Havre de
Grace, and might easily be made a Prize,
if there was any Ship ready to go in Pursuit
of her. So nobly and GREATLY did
our Hero neglect all Obligations conferred
on him by the Enemies of his Country,
that he would have contributed all he
could to the taking his Benefactor, to
whom he owed both his Life and his Liberty. 

The Fisherman took his Advice, and
soon arrived at Deal, where the Reader
will, I doubt not, be as much concerned
as Wild was, that there was not a single
Ship prepared to go on the Expedition. 
Our Hero now saw himself once more
safe on Terra firma; but unluckily at some
Distance from that City where Men of
Ingenuity can most easily supply their
Wants without the Assistance of Money. 
However, as his Talents were superiour to
every Difficulty, he framed so dextrous an
Account of his being a Merchant, having
been taken and plundered by the Enemy,
and of his great Effects in London, that he
was not only heartily regaled by the Fisherman
at his House; but made so handsome
a Booty by way of Borrowing, a
Method of taking which we have before
mentioned, to have his Approbation, that
he was enabled to provide himself with a
Place in the Stage-Coach; which (as God
permitted it to perform the Journey)
brought him, at the appointed time, to an
Inn in the Metropolis. 

And now, Reader, as thou canst be in
no Suspence for the Fate of our great
Man, since we have returned him safe to
the principal Scene of his Glory, we will
a little look back on the Fortunes of Mr.
Heartfree, whom we left in no very pleasant
Situation, especially as the Behaviour
of this poor Wretch will considerably serve
to set off the GREAT and exemplary Conduct
of our Hero; but of this we shall treat
in the next Book. 