


A Sentiment of the Ordinary's, worthy
to be written in Letters of
Gold; a very extraordinary Instance
of Folly in Friendly; and
a dreadful Accident which befel
our Hero. 
Heartfree had not been long
in Newgate before his frequent
Conversation with his Children, and other
Instances of a good Heart, which betrayed 

themselves in his Actions and Conversation,
possessed all about him that he was one of
the silliest Fellows in the Universe. The
Ordinary himself, a very sagacious as well
as worthy Person, declared that he was a
cursed Rogue, but no Conjurer. 
What indeed might induce the former,
i. e. the roguish Part of this Opinion in the
Ordinary was a wicked Sentiment which
Heartfree one Day disclosed in Conversation,
and which we, who are truly Orthodox,
will not pretend to justify, viz. That
he believed a sincere Turk would be saved. 
To this the good Man, with becoming Zeal
and Indignation, answered, I know not what
may become of a sincere Turk, but if this
be your Persuasion, I pronounce it impossible
you should be saved. No, Sir, so far
from a sincere Turk's being within the Pale
of Salvation, neither will any sincere Presbyterian,
Anabaptist, nor Quaker whatever,
be saved. 
But neither did the one nor the other
Part of this Character prevail on Friendly
to abandon his old Master. He spent his 

whole time with him, except only those
Hours when he was absent for his Sake, in
procuring Evidence for him against his
Trial, which was now shortly to come on. 
Indeed this young Man was the only Comfort,
besides a clear Conscience, and the
Hopes beyond the Grave, which this poor
Wretch had; for the Sight of his Children
was like one of those alluring Pleasures
which Men in some Diseases indulge themselves
often fatally in, which at once flatter
and heighten their Malady. 
FRIENDLY being one Day present
while Heartfree was, with Tears in his
Eyes, embracing his eldest Daughter, and
lamenting the hard Fate to which he feared
he should be obliged to leave her, spoke to
him thus. “I have long observed with
Admiration, thou excellent Man, the
Magnanimity with which you go thro'
your own Misfortunes, and the steady
Countenance with which you look on
Death. I have observed that all your Agonies
arise from the Thoughts of parting
with your Children, and leaving them
in a distrest Condition; now, tho' I hope 

all these Fears will prove ill-grounded,
yet, that I may relieve you as much as
possible from them, be assured, that as
nothing can give me more real Misery,
than to observe so tender and loving a
Concern in a Master, to whose Goodness
I owe so many Obligations, and
whom I so sincerely love, so nothing
can afford me equal Pleasure with my contributing
to lessen or to remove it. Be
convinced, therefore, if you can place
any Confidence in my Promise, that I
will employ my little Fortune, which
you know to be not entirely inconsiderable,
in the Support of this
your little Family. Should any Misfortune,
which I pray God avert, happen
to you before you have better provided
for these little ones, I will be myself
their Father, nor shall either of them ever
know Distress, if it be any way in my
Power to prevent it. Your youngest daughter
I will provide for, and as for my little
Prattler, your eldest, as I never yet
thought of any Woman for a Wife, I
will receive her as such at your Hands; 
nor will I ever relinquish her for another.” 

Heartfree flew to his Friend,
and embraced him with Raptures of Acknowledgments. 
He vowed to him that
he had eased every anxious Thought of his
Mind but one, and that he must carry with
him out of the World. “O Friendly,
(cried he) it is my Concern for that best
of Women, whom I hate myself for
having ever censured in my Opinion. O
Friendly, thou didst know her Goodness,
yet, sure her perfect Character none
but myself was ever acquainted with. She
had every perfection both of Mind and
Body, which Heaven hath indulged to
her whole Sex, and enjoyed all in a higher
Excellence than Nature ever suffered another
to possess a single Virtue. Can I bear
the Loss of such a Woman? Can I bear
the Apprehensions of what Mischiefs that
Villain may have done to her, of which
Death is perhaps the lightest?” Friendly
gently interrupted him as soon as he saw
any Opportunity, endeavouring to comfort
him on this Head likewise, by magnifying
every Circumstance which could possibly
afford any Hopes of his seeing her
again. 

By this kind of Behaviour, in which the
young Man exemplified so uncommon an
Height of Friendship, he had soon obtained
in the Castle the Character of as odd
and silly a Fellow as his Master. Indeed,
they were both the By-word, Laughingstock,
and Contempt of the whole Place. 
The Sessions now came on at the Old
Baily. The Grand Jury at Hicks's-Hall had
found the Bill of Indictment against Heartfree,
and on the second Day of the Sessions
he was brought to his Trial; where,
notwithstanding the utmost Efforts of
Friendly, and of the honest old Female Servant,
the Circumstances of the Fact corroborating
the Evidence of Fireblood, as well
as that of Wild, who counterfeited the most
artful Reluctance at appearing against his
old Friend Heartfree, the Jury found the
Prisoner guilty. 
Wild had now accomplished his Scheme; 
for as to what remained, it was certainly unavoidable,
seeing that Heartfree was entirely
void of Interest with the Great, 

and was besides convicted on a Statute, the
Infringers of which could hope no Pardon. 
The Catastrophe, to which our Hero had
reduced this Wretch, was so wonderful an
Effort of Greatness, that it probably
made Fortune envious of her own Darling; 
but whether it was from this Envy,
or only from that known Inconstancy and
Weakness so often and judiciously remarked
in that Lady's Temper, who frequently
lifts Men to the Summit of human Greatness,
only 

—Ut Lapsu graviore ruant;
certain it is, she now began to meditate
Mischief against Wild, who seems to have
come to that Period, at which all the Heroes
and great Men of Antiquity have
arrived, and which she was resolved they
never should transcend. In short, there
seems to be a certain Measure of Mischief
and Iniquity, which every great Man
is to fill up, and then Fortune looks on him
of no more Use than a Silk-Worm whose
Bottom is spun, and deserts him. For Mr. 

Blueskin being convicted the same Day of
Robbery, by our Hero, an Unkindness,
which tho' he had drawn on himself and
necessitated him to, he took greatly amiss; 
as Wild was standing near him, with that
Disregard and Indifference which great
Men are too carelessly inclined to have for
those whom they have ruined; Blueskin
privily drawing a Knife, thrust the same into
the Body of our Hero with such Violence,
that all who saw it concluded he had done
his Business. And indeed, had not Fortune,
not so much out of Love to our Hero, as
from a fixed Resolution to accomplish a
certain Purpose of which we have formerly
given a Hint, carefully placed his Guts out
of the Way, he must have fallen a Sacrifice
to the Wrath of his Enemy, which, as
he said, he did not deserve; for had he
been contented to have robbed and only
submitted to give him the Booty, he might
have still continued safe and un-impeached
in the Gang; but so it was, that the Knife
missing those noble Parts (the noblest of
many) the Guts, perforated only the hollow
of his Belly, and caused no other Harm than
an immoderate Effusion of Blood, of which, 

tho' it at present weakened him, he soon
after recovered. 
This Accident, however, was in the End
attended with worse Consequences: For as
very few People (those greatest of all Men,
absolute Princes, excepted) attempt to cut the
Thread of human Life, like the Fatal Sisters,
merely out of Wantonness and for
their Diversion, but rather by so doing propose
to themselves the Acquisition of some
future Good, or the avenging some past Evil; 
and as the former of these Motives did not
appear probable, it put inquisitive Persons
on examining into the latter. Now, as the
vast Schemes of Wild, when they were discovered,
however Great in their Nature,
seemed to some persons like the Projects
of most other great Men, rather to be
calculated for the Glory of the great Man
himself, than to redound to the general Good
of Society; designs began to be laid by
several of those who thought it principally
their Duty to put a Stop to the future Progress
of our Hero, and a learned Judge
particularly, a great Enemy to this kind of
Greatness, procured a Clause in an Act 

of Parliament as a Trap for Wild, which
he soon after fell into. By this Law it was
made Capital in a Prig to steal with the
Hands of other People. A Law so plainly
calculated for the Destruction of all Priggish
Greatness, that it was indeed impossible
for our Hero to avoid it. 