




Being the first Chapter of the eighth Book. 
The History must now look a
little backwards to those Circumstances,
which led to the Catastrophe
mentioned at the End of the last
Book. 
When Amelia went out in the Morning,
she left her Children to the Care of her Husband. 
In this amiable Office he had been
engaged near an Hour; and was at that
very Time lying along on the Floor, and
his little Things crawling and playing about
him, when a most violent Knock was heard
at the Door; and immediately a Footman
running up Stairs, acquainted him, that his 

Lady was taken violently ill, and carried
into Mrs. Chenevix's Toy-shop. 
Booth no sooner heard this Account,
which was delivered with great Appearance
of Haste and Earnestness, than he
leapt suddenly from the Floor; and leaving
his Children roaring at the News of their
Mother's Illness, in strict Charge with his
Maid, he ran as fast as his Legs could
carry him to the Place; or towards the
Place rather: For, before he arrived at
the Shop, a Gentleman stopt him full
Butt, crying, ‘Captain, whither so fast?’ 
–––Booth answered eagerly, ‘Whoever you
are, Friend, don't ask me any Questions
now.’ –––‘You must pardon me, Captain,’ 
answered the Gentleman; ‘but
I have a little Business with your Honour
–––In short, Captain, I have a small
Warrant here in my Pocket against your
Honour, at the Suit of one Dr. Harrison.’ 
‘You are a Bailiff then,’ says
Booth. ‘I am an Officer, Sir,’ answered
the other. –––‘Well, Sir, it is in vain to
contend,’ cries Booth; ‘but let me beg
you will permit me only to step to Mrs.
Chenevix's–––I will attend you, upon my
Honour, wherever you please; but my
Wife lies violently ill there.’ –––‘O, for 

that Matter,’ answered the Bailiff, ‘you
may set your Heart at Ease. Your
Lady, I hope, is very well. I assure
you, she is not there; you will excuse
me, Captain, these are only Stratagems
of War. Bolus and Virtus, quis in a Hostess
equirit?’ –––‘Sir, I honour your Learning,’ 
cries Booth, ‘and could almost kiss
you for what you tell me. I assure you,
I would forgive you five hundred Arrests
for such a Piece of News. Well,
Sir, and whither am I to go with you?’ 
–––‘O, any where; where your Honour
pleases,’ cries the Bailiff. ‘Then suppose
we go to Brown's Coffee-house,’ 
said the Prisoner. ‘No,’ answered the
Bailiff, ‘that will not do; that's in the
Verge of the Court.’ ‘Why then, to
the nearest Tavern,’ said Booth. ‘No,
not to a Tavern,’ cries the other, ‘that
is not a Place of Security; and you
know, Captain, your Honour is a shy
Cock; I have been after your Honour
these three Months–––Come, Sir, you
must go to my House, if you please.’ 
‘With all my Heart,’ answered Booth,
‘if it be any where hereabouts.’ ‘O,
it is but a little Ways off,’ replied the
Bailiff; ‘it is only in Gray's-Inn-Lane, 

just by almost.’ He then called a Coach,
and desired his Prisoner to walk in. 
Booth entered the Coach without any
Resistance, which had he been inclined
to make, he must have plainly perceived
would have been ineffectual, as the Bailiff
appeared to have several Followers at
Hand, two of whom, beside the Commander
in Chief, mounted with him into
the Coach. As Booth was a sweet-tempered
Man, as well as somewhat of a
Philosopher, he behaved with all the
Good Humour imaginable, and, indeed,
with more than his Companions; who,
however, shewed him what they call Civility,
that is, they neither struck him nor
spit in his Face. 
Notwithstanding the Pleasantry which
Booth endeavoured to preserve, he in
Reality envied every Labourer whom he
saw pass by him in his Way. The Charms
of Liberty against his Will rushed on
his Mind; and he could not avoid
suggesting to himself, how much more
happy was the poorest Wretch who without
Controul could repair to his homely
Habitation, and to his Family; compared
to him, who was thus violently, and yet 

lawfully torn away from the Company of
his Wife and Children. And their Condition,
especially that of his Amelia, gave
his Heart many a severe and bitter
Pang. 
At length he arrived at the Bailiff's
Mansion, and was ushered into a Room; 
in which were several Persons. Booth desired
to be alone, upon which the Bailiff
waited on him up Stairs, into an Apartment,
the Windows of which were well
fortified with Iron Bars; but the Walls
had not the least Outwork raised before
them; they were, indeed, what is generally
called naked, the Bricks having been
only covered with a thin Plaister, which
in many Places was mouldered away. 
The first Demand made upon Booth
was for Coach-hire, which amounted to
two Shillings, according to the Bailiff's
Account; that being just double the legal
Fare. He was then asked if he did not
chuse a Bowl of Punch; to which he having
answered in the Negative, the Bailiff replied,
‘Nay, Sir, just as you please. I
don't ask you to drink, if you don't
chuse it; but certainly you know the
Custom, the House is full of Prisoners, 

and I can't afford Gentlemen a Room
to themselves for nothing.’ 
Booth presently took this Hint, indeed
it was a pretty broad one, and told the
Bailiff, he should not scruple to pay him
his Price; but in Fact, he never drank
unless at his Meals. ‘As to that, Sir,’ 
cries the Bailiff, ‘it is just as your Honour
pleases. I scorn to impose upon
any Gentleman in Misfortunes: I wish
you well out of them for my Part. 
Your Honour can take nothing amiss of
me, I only does my Duty, what I am
bound to do; and as you says you don't
care to drink any thing, what will you
be pleased to have for Dinner? 
Booth then complied in bespeaking a
Dish of Meat, and told the Bailiff, he
would drink a Bottle with him after
Dinner. He then desired the Favour of
Pen, Ink and Paper, and a Messenger; 
all which were immediately procured him,
the Bailiff telling him he might send
wherever he pleased, and repeating his
Concern for Booth's Misfortunes, and a
hearty Desire to see the End of them. 

The Messenger was just dispatched
with the Letter, when who should arrive
but honest Atkinson? A Soldier of the
Guards, belonging to the same Company
with the Serjeant, and who had known
Booth at Gibraltar, had seen the Arrest,
and heard the Orders given to the Coachman. 
This Fellow accidentally meeting
Atkinson had acquainted him with the
whole Affair. 
At the Appearance of Atkinson, Joy
immediately overspread the Countenance
of Booth. The Ceremonials which past
between them are unnecessary to be repeated. 
Atkinson was soon dispatched to
the Attorney, and to Mrs. Ellison, as the
Reader hath before heard from his own
Mouth. 
Booth now greatly lamented that he had
writ to his Wife. He thought she might
have been acquainted with the Affair better
by the Serjeant. Booth begged him,
however, to do every thing in his Power
to comfort her, to assure her that he was
in perfect Health and good Spirits, and
to lessen as much as possible the Concern, 

which he knew she would have at the
reading his Letter. 
The Serjeant, however, as the Reader
hath seen, brought himself the first Account
of the Arrest. Indeed, the other
Messenger did not arrive till a full Hour
afterwards. This was not owing to any
Slowness of his, but to many previous
Errands which he was to execute before
the Delivery of the Letter: For, notwithstanding
the earnest Desire which the
Bailiff had declared to see Booth out of
his Troubles, he had ordered the Porter,
who was his Follower, to call upon two
or three other Bailiffs, and as many Attornies,
to try to load his Prisoner with
as many Actions as possible. 
Here the Reader may be apt to conclude,
that the Bailiff, instead of being a
Friend, was really an Enemy to poor
Booth; but in Fact, he was not so. His
Desire was no more than to accumulate
Bail Bonds; for the Bailiff was reckoned
an honest and good Sort of Man in his
Way, and had no more Malice against
the Bodies in his Custody, than a Butcher
hath to those in his; and as the latter
when he takes his Knife in Hand, hath 

no Idea but of the Joints into which he
is to cut the Carcase; so the former when
he handles his Writ, hath no other Design
but to cut out the Body into as many
Bail Bonds as possible. As to the Life of
the Animal, or the Liberty of the Man,
they are Thoughts which never obtrude
themselves on either. 



Containing an Account of Mr. Booth's Fellow
Sufferers. 
Before we return to Amelia, we
must detain our Reader a little longer
with Mr. Booth, in the Custody of Mr. Bondum
the Bailiff, who now informed his Prisoner,
that he was welcome to the Liberty of
the House with the other Gentlemen. 
Booth asked who those Gentlemen were,
‘One of them, Sir,’ says Mr. Bondum,
‘is a very great Writer or Author, as they
call him–––He hath been here these five
Weeks, at the Suit of a Bookseller, for
Eleven Pound odd Money; but he expects
to be discharged in a Day or two: 
For he hath writ out the Debt. He is
now writing for Five or Six Booksellers, 

and he will get you sometimes, when
he sits to it, a Matter of fifteen Shillings
a Day. For he is a very good Pen, they
say; but is apt to be idle. Some Days
he wont write above five Hours; but
at other times I have known him at it
above Sixteen.’ –––‘Ay!’ cries Booth,
‘Pray what are his Productions? –––What
doth he write?’ ‘Why sometimes,’ answered
Bondum, ‘He writes your History
Books for your Numbers, and sometimes
your Verses, your Poems, what
do you call them? And then again he
writes News for your NewsPapers.’ –––‘Ay
indeed! he is a most extraordinary Man
truly–––How doth he get his News here?’ 
–––‘Why he makes it, as he doth your
Parliament Speeches for your Magazines. 
He reads them to us sometimes
over a Bowl of Punch. –––To be sure it
is all one as if one was in the Parliament
House–––It is about Liberty and Freedom,
and about the Constitution of
England. I say nothing for my Part: 
For I will keep my Neck out of a
Halter; but faith he makes it out plainly
to me, that all Matters are not as they
should be. I am all for Liberty, for my
Part.’ ‘Is that so consistent with your
Calling?’ cries Booth, ‘I thought, my 

Friend, you had lived by depriving Men
of their Liberty.’ ‘That's another
Matter,’ cries the Bailiff, ‘that's all
according to Law, and in the Way of
Business. To be sure Men must be
obliged to pay their Debts, or else there
would be an End of every Thing.’ 
Booth desired the Bailiff to give him his
Opinion of Liberty. Upon which he hesitated
a Moment, and then cried out,
‘O 'tis a fine Thing, 'tis a very fine
Thing, and the Constitution of England.’ 
Booth told him that by the old Constitution
of England, he had heard that Men
could not be arrested for Debt; to which
the Bailiff answered, that must have been
in very bad Times. ‘Because as why,’ 
says he, ‘would it not be the hardest
Thing in the World if a Man could
not arrest another for a just and lawful
Debt? Besides, Sir, you must be mistaken: 
For, how could that ever be!
is not Liberty the Constitution of England? 
Well, and is not the Constitution,
as a Man may say,–––whereby the Constitution,
that is the Law and Liberty,
and all that &wblank;. 
Booth had a little Mercy upon the poor
Bailiff, when he found him rounding in 

this Manner, and told him he had made
the Matter very clear. Booth then proceeded
to enquire after the other Gentlemen,
his Fellows in Affliction; upon
which Bondum acquainted him that one of
the Prisoners was a poor Fellow. ‘He
calls himself a Gentleman,’ said Bondum; 
‘but I am sure I never saw any thing
genteel by him. In a Week that he
hath been in my House, he hath drank
only part of one Bottle of Wine. I
intend to carry him to Newgate within
a Day or two, if he can't find Bail,
which I suppose he will not be able to
do: For every Body says he is an undone
Man. He hath run out all he
hath by Losses in Business, and one way
or other; and he hath a Wife and seven
Children. –––Here was the whole Family
here the other Day, all howling together. 
I never saw such a beggarly Crew; 
I was almost ashamed to see them in
my House. I thought they seemed
fitter for Bridewell than any other Place. 
To be sure, I do not reckon him as
proper Company for such as you, Sir; 
but there is another Prisoner in the
House that I dare say you will like
very much. He is, indeed, very much
of a Gentleman, and spends his Money 

like one. I have had him only three
Days, and I am afraid he won't stay
much longer. They say, indeed, he is
a Gamester; but what is that to me or
any one, as long as a Man appears as a
Gentleman? I always love to speak by
People as I find. And, in my Opinion,
he is fit Company for the greatest Lord in
the Land; for he hath very good Cloaths,
and Money enough. He is not here for
Debt, but upon a Judge's Warrant for
an Assault and Battery; for the Tipstaff
locks up here.’ 
The Bailiff was thus haranguing, when
he was interrupted by the Arrival of the
Attorney, whom the trusty Serjeant had,
with the utmost Expedition, found out, and
dispatched to the Relief of his distressed
Friend; but before we proceed any further
with the Captain, we will return to poor
Amelia, for whom, considering the Situation
in which we left her, the good-natured
Reader may be, perhaps, in no small
Degree sollicitous. 




Containing some extraordinary Behaviour in
Mrs. Ellison. 
The Serjeant being departed to convey
Mrs. Ellison to the Captain, his
Wife went to fetch Amelia's Children to
their Mother. 
Amelia's Concern for the Distresses of
her Husband was aggravated at the Sight
of her Children. ‘Good Heavens!’ she
cry'd, ‘what will, what can become of
these poor little Wretches! Why have
I produced these little Creatures only to
give them a Share of Poverty and Misery!’ 
At which Words she embraced
them eagerly in her Arms, and bedew'd
them both with her Tears. 
The Childrens Eyes soon overflowed as
fast as their Mother's, tho' neither of
them knew the Cause of her Affliction. 
The little Boy, who was the elder, and
much the sharper of the two, imputed the
Agonies of his Mother to her Illness, according
to the Account brought to his Father
in his Presence. 

When Amelia became acquainted with
the Child's Apprehensions, she soon satisfied
him that she was in a perfect State of
Health; at which the little Thing express'd
great Satisfaction, and said, he was glad she
was well again. —Amelia told him she had not
been in the least disordered. —Upon which
the Innocent cry'd out, ‘La! how can
People tell such Fibs! A great tall
Man told my Papa you was taken very
ill at Mrs. Somebody's Shop; and my
poor Papa presently ran down Stairs, I
was afraid he would have broke his
Neck to come to you.’ 
‘O the Villains,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson,
‘what a Stratagem was here to take away
your Husband!’ 
‘Take away!’ answered the Child— 
‘What hath any Body taken away Papa? 
—Sure that naughty fibbing Man hath
not taken away Papa?’ 
Amelia begged Mrs. Atkinson to say
something to her Children; for that her
Spirits were over-powered. She then threw
herself into a Chair, and gave a full Vent 

to a Passion almost too strong for her delicate
Constitution. 
The Scene that followed, during some
Minutes, is beyond my Power of Description: 
I must beg the Readers Hearts
to suggest it to themselves. The Children
hung on their Mother, whom they endeavour'd
in vain to comfort; as Mrs. Atkinson
did in vain attempt to pacify them,
telling them, all would be well, and they
would soon see their Papa again. 
At length, partly by the Persuasions of
Mrs. Atkinson, partly from Consideration
of her little ones, and more, perhaps,
from the Relief which she had acquired by
her Tears, Amelia became a little composed. 
Nothing worth Notice past in this miserable
Company from this Time till the
Return of Mrs. Ellison from the Bailiff's
House; and to draw out Scenes of Wretchedness
to too great a Length is a Task
very uneasy to the Writer, and for which
none but Readers of a most gloomy Complexion
will think themselves ever obliged
to his Labours. 

At length, Mrs. Ellison arrived, and entered
the Room with an Air of Gaiety, rather
misbecoming the Occasion. When she had
seated herself in a Chair, she told Amelia
that the Captain was very well, and in
good Spirits; and that he earnestly desired
her to keep up hers. ‘Come, Madam,’ 
said she, ‘don't be disconsolate; I hope we
shall soon be able to get him out of his
Troubles. The Debts, indeed, amount
to more than I expected; however, Ways
may be found to redeem him. He must
own himself guilty of some Rashness in
going out of the Verge, when he knew
to what he was liable; but that is now
not to be remedied. If he had followed
my Advice, this had not happened; but
Men will be head-strong.’ 
‘I cannot bear this,’ cries Amelia; ‘shall
I hear that best of Creatures blamed for
his Tenderness to me?’ 
‘Well, I will not blame him,’ answered
Mrs. Ellison, ‘I am sure I propose nothing
but to serve him: And if you will do
as much to serve him yourself, he will
not long be a Prisoner.’ 

‘I do!’ cries Amelia; ‘Oh Heavens! is
there a Thing upon Earth’— 
‘Yes, there is a Thing upon Earth,’ said
Mrs. Ellison, ‘and a very easy Thing too. 
—And yet I will venture my Life, you
start when I propose it. And yet when I
consider that you are a Woman of Understanding,
I know not why I should think
so; for sure you must have too much good
Sense to imagine that you can cry your
Husband out of Prison. If this would have
done, I see you have almost cried your
Eyes out already. And yet you may do
the Business by a much pleasanter Way
than by crying and bawling.’ 
‘What do you mean, Madam,!’ cries
Amelia. —‘For my Part I cannot guess your
Meaning.’ 
‘Before I tell you then, Madam,’ answered
Mrs. Ellison, ‘I must inform you,
if you do not already know it, that the
Captain is charged with Actions to the
Amount of near 500l. I am sure I
would willingly be his Bail; but I know
my Bail would not be taken for that
Sum. You must consider, therefore, 

Madam, what Chance you have of redeeming
him; unless you chuse, as perhaps
some Wives would, that he should
lie all his Life in Prison.’ 
At these Words, Amelia discharged a
Shower of Tears, and gave every Mark of
the most frantic Grief. 
‘Why there now,’ cries Mrs. Ellison,
‘while you will indulge these extravagant
Passions, how can you be capable of listening
to the Voice of Reason. I know I am
a Fool in concerning myself thus with the
Affairs of others. I know the thankless
Office I undertake; and yet I love
you so, my dear Mrs. Booth, that I cannot
bear to see you afflicted, and I would
comfort you, if you would suffer me. 
Let me beg you to make your Mind
easy; and within these two Days, I will
engage to set your Husband at Liberty. 
‘Harkee, Child, only behave like a
Woman of Spirit this Evening, and
keep your Appointment, notwithstanding
what hath happened; and I am convinced
there is one, who hath the Power
and the Will to serve you.’ 

Mrs. Ellison spoke the latter Part of her
Speech in a Whisper; so that Mrs. Atkinson,
who was then engaged with the Children,
might not hear her; but Amelia answered
aloud, and said, ‘What Appointment
would you have me keep this
Evening?’ 
‘Nay, nay, if you have forgot,’ cries
Mrs. Ellison, ‘I will tell you more another
time; but come, will you go home? my
Dinner is ready by this Time, and you
shall dine with me.’ 
‘Talk not to me of Dinners,’ cries
Amelia. ‘My Stomach is too full already.’ 
‘Nay, but, dear Madam,’ answered
Mrs. Ellison,—‘let me beseech you to go
home with me. I do not care,’ says
she, whispering, ‘to speak before some
Folks.’ 
‘I have no Secret, Madam, in the
World,’ reply'd Amelia aloud, ‘which I
would not communicate to this Lady: 
For I shall always acknowledge the highest 

Obligations to her for the Secrets she
hath imparted to me.’ 
‘Madam,’ said Mrs. Ellison, ‘I do
not interfere with Obligations. I am
glad the Lady hath obliged you so
much; and I wish all People were equally
mindful of Obligations. I hope I
have omitted no Opportunity of endeavouring
to oblige Mrs. Booth, as well as
I have some other Folks.’ 
‘If by other Folks, Madam, you mean
me,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson, ‘I confess, I sincerely
believe you intended the same
Obligation to us both: and I have the
Pleasure to think it is owing to me that
this Lady is not as much obliged to you
as I am.’ 
‘I protest, Madam, I can hardly guess
your Meaning,’ said Mrs. Ellison. —‘Do
you really intend to affront me, Madam?’ 
‘I intend to preserve Innocence and Virtue,
if it be in my Power, Madam,’ 
answered the other. ‘And sure nothing
but the most eager Resolution to destroy 

it, could induce you to mention such an
Appointment at such a Time.’ 
‘I did not expect this Treatment from
you, Madam,’ cries Mrs. Ellison: ‘Such
ingratitude I could not have believed,
had it been reported to me by any
other.’ 
‘Such Impudence,’ answered Mrs. Atkinson,
‘must exceed, I think, all Belief; 
but when Women once abandon that
Modesty which is the Characteristic of
their Sex, they seldom set any Bounds to
their Assurance.’ 
‘I could not have believed this to have
been in Human Nature;’ cries Mrs. Ellison. 
‘Is this the Woman whom I
have fed, have cloathed, have supported? 
Who owes to my Charity, and my
Intercessions, that she is not at this
Day destitute of all the Necessaries of
Life!’ 
‘I own it all,’ answered Mrs. Atkinson. 
‘—And I add the Favour of a Masquerade
Ticket to the Number. Could I
have thought, Madam, that you would,
before my Face, have asked another Lady
to go to the same Place with the same 

Man! —But I ask your Pardon, I impute
rather more Assurance to you than you
are Mistress of—You have endeavoured
to keep the Assignation a Secret from
me; and it was by mere Accident only
that I discovered it; unless there are
some Guardian Angels, that in general
protect Innocence and Virtue, tho' I may
say I have not always found them so
watchful.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ said Mrs. Ellison,
‘you are not worth my Answer, nor will
I stay a Moment longer with such a
Person. —So, Mrs. Booth, you have your
Choice, Madam, whether you will go
with me, or remain in the Company of
this Lady.’ 
‘If so, Madam,’ answered Mrs. Booth,
‘I shall not be long in determining to stay
where I am.’ 
Mrs. Ellison then casting a Look of
great Indignation at both the Ladies, made
a short Speech full of Invectives against
Mrs. Atkinson, and not without oblique
Hints of Ingratitude against poor Amelia; 
after which she burst out of the Room,
and out of the House; and made Haste
to her own Home, in a Condition 

of Mind, to which Fortune without Guilt
cannot, I believe, reduce any one. 
Indeed, how much the Superiority of
Misery is on the Side of Wickedness, may
appear to every Reader who will compare
the present Situation of Amelia, with that
of Mrs. Ellison. Fortune had attack'd the
former with almost the highest Degree of
her Malice. She was involved in a Scene
of most exquisite Distress; and her Husband,
her principal Comfort, torn violently
from her Arms; yet her Sorrow,
however exquisite, was all soft and tender; 
nor was she without many Consolations. 
Her Case, however hard, was not absolutely
desperate; for scarce any Condition
of Fortune can be so. Art and Industry,
Chance and Friends have often relieved the
most distrest Circumstances, and converted
them into Opulence. In all these she had
Hopes on this Side the Grave, and perfect
Virtue and Innocence gave her the strongest
Assurances on the other. Whereas in
the Bosom of Mrs. Ellison all was Storm
and Tempest; Anger, Revenge, Fear, and
Pride, like so many raging Furies, possessed
her Mind, and tortured her with Disappointment
and Shame. Loss of Reputation,
which is generally irreparable, was 

to be her Lot; Loss of Friends is of
this the certain Consequence; all on this
Side the Grave appeared dreary and comfortless; 
and eternal Misery on the other,
closed the gloomy Prospect. 
Hence, my worthy Reader, console
thyself, that however few of the other
good Things of Life are thy Lot; the
best of all Things, which is Innocence,
is always within thy own Power; and tho'
Fortune may make thee often unhappy,
she can never make thee completely and
irreparably miserable without thy own
Consent. 



Containing, among many Matters, the exemplary
Behaviour of Colonel James. 
When Mrs. Ellison was departed,
Mrs. Atkinson began to apply all
her Art to soothe and comfort Amelia; 
but was presently prevented by her: ‘I
am ashamed, dear Madam,’ said Amelia,
‘of having indulged my Affliction so
much at your Expence. The Suddenness
of the Occasion is my only Excuse; 
for had I had Time to summon my 

Resolution to my Assistance, I hope I
am Mistress of more Patience than you
have hitherto seen me exert. I know,
Madam, in my unwarrantable Excesses, I
have been guilty of many Transgressions. 
First, against that Divine Will and
Pleasure, without whose Permission at
least, no Human Accident can happen; 
in the next Place, Madam, if any
thing can aggravate such a Fault, I
have transgressed the Laws of Friendship,
as well as Decency, in throwing
upon you some Part of the Load of my
Grief; and again I have sinned against
Common Sense, which should teach me,
instead of weakly and heavily lamenting
my Misfortunes, to rouse all my
Spirits to remove them. In this Light
I am shocked at my own Folly, and
am resolved to leave my Children under
your Care, and go directly to my Husband. 
I may comfort him. I may
assist him. I may relieve him. There is
nothing now too difficult for me to
undertake.’ 
Mrs. Atkinson greatly approved and
complimented her Friend on all the former
Part of her Speech, except what related
to herself, on which she spoke very 

civilly, and I believe with great Truth; 
but as to her Determination of going to
her Husband, she endeavoured to dissuade
her, at least she begged her to defer it
for the present, and till the Serjeant returned
home. She then reminded Amelia
that it was now past Five in the Afternoon,
and that she had not taken any Refreshment
but a Dish of Tea the whole Day,
and desired she would give her Leave to
procure her a Chick, or any thing she
liked better for her Dinner. 
Amelia thanked her Friend, and said,
she would sit down with her to whatever
she pleased; ‘but if I do not eat,’ said she,
‘I would not have you impute it to any
thing but want of Appetite: For I
assure you all things are equally indifferent
to me. I am more solicitous
about these poor little Things, who
have not been used to fast so long. 
Heaven knows what may hereafter be
their Fate. 
Mrs. Atkinson bid her hope the best,
and then recommended the Children to
the Care of her Maid. 

And now arrived a Servant from Mrs.
James, with an Invitation to Capt. Booth
and his Lady, to dine with the Colonel the
Day after the next. This a little perplexed
Amelia; but after a short Consideration
she dispatched an Answer to Mrs.
James, in which she concisely informed
her of what had happened. 
The honest Serjeant, who had been on
his Legs almost the whole Day, now returned,
and brought Amelia a short Letter
from her Husband; in which he gave her
the most solemn Assurances of his Health
and Spirits, and begged her with great
Earnestness to take Care to preserve her
own; which if she did, he said he had no
doubt but that they should shortly be
happy. He added something of Hopes
from my Lord, with which Mrs. Ellison
had amused him; and which served only
to destroy the Comfort that Amelia received
from the rest of his Letter. 
Whilst Amelia, the Serjeant and his
Lady were engaged in a cold Collation,
for which Purpose a cold Chicken was
procured from the Tavern for the Ladies,
and two Pound of cold Beef for the Serjeant; 

a violent knocking was heard at
the Door, and presently afterwards Colonel
James entered the Room. After proper
Compliments had past, the Colonel told
Amelia, that her Letter was brought to
Mrs. James while they were at Table, and
that on her shewing it him, he had
immediately rose up, made an Apology
to his Company, and took a Chair to her. 
He spoke to her with great Tenderness
on the Occasion, and desired her to make
herself easy; assuring her, that he would
leave nothing in his Power undone to
serve her Husband. He then gave her
an Invitation, in his Wife's Name, to his
own House, in the most pressing Manner. 
Amelia returned him very hearty Thanks
for all his kind Offers; but begged to
decline that of an Apartment in his House. 
She said, as she could not leave her
Children, so neither could she think of
bringing such a Trouble with her into
his Family; and tho' the Colonel gave her
many Assurances that her Children as well
as herself would be very welcome to Mrs.
James, and even be took himself to Entreaties,
she still persisted obstinately in her Refusal. 

In real Truth, Amelia had taken a vast
Affection for Mrs. Atkinson, of the Comfort
of whose Company she could not bear
to be deprived in her Distress; nor to exchange
it for that of Mrs. James, to
whom she had lately conceived no little
Dislike. 
The Colonel, when he found he could
not prevail with Amelia to accept his Invitation,
desisted from any further Solicitations. 
He then took a Bank-bill of
fifty Pounds from his Pocket-Book, and
said,–––‘You will pardon me, dear Madam,
if I chuse to impute your Refusal
of my House, rather to a Dislike of my
Wife, who I will not pretend to be
the most agreeable of Women, (all
Men,’ said he sighing, ‘have not Captain
Booth's Fortune) than to any Aversion
or Anger to me. I must insist upon
it therefore, to make your present
Habitation as easy to you as possible. ––– 
I hope, Madam, you will not deny me
this Happiness; I beg you will honour
me with the Acceptance of this Trifle. 
He then put the Note into her Hand,
and declared that the Honour of touching 

it was worth a hundred times that
Sum.’ 
‘I protest, Colonel James,’ cried Amelia
blushing, ‘I know not what to do or
say, your Goodness so greatly confounds
me. Can I, who am so well acquainted
with the many great Obligations
Mr. Booth already hath to your
Generosity, consent that you should add
more to a Debt we never can pay?—’ 
The Colonel stopt her short, protesting
that she misplaced the Obligation: For
that if to confer the highest Happiness
was to oblige, he was obliged to her Acceptance. 
‘And I do assure you, Madam,’ 
said he, ‘if this trifling Sum, or a much
larger, can contribute to your Ease, I
shall consider myself as the happiest
Man upon Earth, in being able to supply
it; and you, Madam, my greatest Benefactor
in receiving it.’ 
Amelia then put the Note in her Pocket; 
and they entered into a Conversation, in
which many civil Things were said on
both Sides; but what was chiefly worth
Remark, was that Amelia had almost her
Husband constantly in her Mouth, and 

the Colonel never mentioned him: the
former seemed desirous to lay all Obligations,
as much as possible, to the Account
of her Husband; and the latter endeavoured
with the utmost Delicacy to insinuate
that her Happiness was the main,
and indeed only Point which he had in
View. 
Amelia had made no Doubt, at the Colonel's
first Appearance, but that he intended
to go directly to her Husband. When
he dropt therefore a Hint of his Intention
to visit him next Morning, she appeared
visibly shocked at the Delay. The Colonel
perceiving this, said, ‘However inconvenient
it may be; yet, Madam, if it
will oblige you, or if you desire it, I
will even go To-night,’ Amelia answered,
‘My Husband would be far
from desiring to derive any Good from
your Inconvenience; but if you put it
to me, I must be excused for saying, I
desire nothing more in the World than
to send him so great a Comfort as I
know he will receive from the Presence
of such a Friend.’ ‘Then to shew you,
Madam,’ cries the Colonel, ‘that I desire
nothing more in the World than to 

give you Pleasure, I will go to him
immediately.’ 
Amelia then bethought herself of the
Serjeant, and told the Colonel, his old
Acquaintance Atkinson whom he had
known at Gibraltar, was then in the House,
and would conduct him to the Place. 
The Serjeant was immediately called in,
paid his Respects to the Colonel, and was
acknowledged by him. They both immediately
set forward, Amelia to the utmost
of her Power pressing their Departure. 
Mrs. Atkinson now returned to Amelia,
and was by her acquainted with the Colonel's
late Generosity: For her Heart so
boiled over with Gratitude, that she could
not conceal the Ebullition. Amelia likewise
gave her Friend a full Narrative of
the Colonel's former Behaviour and Friendship
to her Husband, as well Abroad as
in England; and ended with declaring,
that she believed him to be the most generous
Man upon Earth. 
Mrs. Atkinson agreed with Amelia's
Conclusion, and said she was glad to hear
there was any such Man. They then proceeded 

with the Children to the Tea
Table, where Panegyric, and not Scandal,
was the Topic of their Conversation; and
of this Panegyric the Colonel was the
Subject; both the Ladies seeming to vie
with each other in celebrating the Praises
of his Goodness. 



Comments upon Authors. 
Having left Amelia in as comfortable
a Situation as could possibly be
expected, her immediate Distresses relieved,
and her Heart filled with great Hopes
from the Friendship of the Colonel; we
will now return to Booth, who when the
Attorney and Serjeant had left him,
received a Visit from that great Author
of whom honourable Mention is made in
our second Chapter. 
Booth, as the Reader may be pleased to
remember, was a pretty good Master of
the Classics: For his Father, tho' he designed
his Son for the Army, did not
think it necessary to breed him up a Block-head. 
He did not perhaps imagine that
a competent Share of Latin and Greek 

would make his Son either a Pedant or a
Coward. He considered likewise, probably,
that the Life of a Soldier is in general a
Life of Idleness, and might think that
the spare Hours of an Officer in Country
Quarters would be as well employed with
a Book, as in sauntring about the Streets,
loitering in a Coffee House, sotting in a
Tavern, or in laying Schemes to debauch
and ruin a Set of harmless ignorant Country
Girls. 
As Booth was therefore what might well
be called, in this Age at least, a Man of
Learning, he began to discourse our
Author on Subjects of Literature. ‘I
think, Sir,’ says he, ‘that Doctor Swift
hath been generally allowed by the
Critics in this Kingdom, to be the
greatest Master of Humour that ever
wrote. Indeed, I allow him to have
possessed most admirable Talents of this
Kind; and if Rabelais was his Master,
I think he proves the Truth of the common
Greek Proverb–––That the Scholar
is often superior to the Master. As to
Cervantes, I do not think we can make
any just Comparison; for tho' Mr. Pope
compliments him with sometimes taking 

Cervantes' serious Air.’ ‘I remember
the Passage,’ cries the Author. 

‘Oh thou, whatever Title please thy Ear,
‘Dean, Drapier, Bickerstaff or Gulliver;
‘Whether you take Cervantes' serious Air,
‘Or laugh and shake in Rabelais' easy Chair.
‘You are right, Sir,’ said Booth; ‘but
tho' I should agree that the Doctor hath
sometimes condescended to imitate Rabelais,
I do not remember to have seen
in his Works the least Attempt in the
Manner of Cervantes. But there is one
in his own Way, and whom I am convinced
he studied above all others— 
You guess, I believe, I am going to
name Lucian. This Author, I say, I
am convinced he followed; but I think
he followed him at a Distance; as, to say
the Truth, every other Writer of this
Kind hath done in my Opinion: For
none, I think, hath yet equalled him. 
I agree, indeed, entirely with Mr. Moyle
in his Discourse on the Age of the Philopatris,
when he gives him the Epithet
of the incomparable Lucian; and
incomparable I believe he will remain
as long as the Language in which he
wrote shall endure. What an inimitable 

Piece of Humour is his Cock.’ — 
‘I remember it very well,’ cries the Author,
‘his Story of a Cock and a Bull is
excellent.’ Booth stared at this, and
asked the Author what he meant by the
Bull? ‘Nay,’ answered he, ‘I don't know
very well upon my Soul. It is a long
time since I read him. I learnt him all
over at School, I have not read him
much since. And pray, Sir,’ said he,
‘how do you like his Pharsalia? Don't
you think Mr. Rowe's Translation a very
fine one?’ Booth replied, ‘I believe we
are talking of different Authors. The
Pharsalia which Mr. Rowe translated
was written by Lucan; but I have been
speaking of Lucian, a Greek Writer, and
in my Opinion the greatest in the Humorous
Way, that ever the World produced.’ 
‘Ay!’ cries the Author, ‘he
was indeed so, a very excellent Writer
indeed. I fancy a Translation of him
would sell very well.’ ‘I do not know,
indeed,’ cries Booth. ‘A good Translation
of him would be a valuable Book. 
I have seen a wretched one published by
Mr. Dryden, but translated by others,
who in many Places have misunderstood
Lucian's Meaning, and have no where
preserved the Spirit of the Original.’ 

‘That is great Pity,’ says the Author. 
‘Pray, Sir, is he well translated into
French?’ Booth answered, he could
not tell; but that he doubted it very
much, having never seen a good Version
into that Language, out of the Greek. 
‘To confess the Truth, I believe,’ said he,
‘the French Translators have generally consulted
the Latin only; which, in some
of the few Greek Writers I have read,
is intolerably bad. And as the English
Translators, for the most Part, pursue
the French, we may easily guess, what
Spirit those Copies of bad Copies of
bad Copies must preserve of the Original.’ 
‘Egad, you are a shrewd Guesser,’ 
cries the Author, ‘I am glad the Booksellers
have not your Sagacity. But
how should it be otherwise, considering
the Price they pay by the Sheet? The
Greek, you will allow, is a hard Language; 
and there are few Gentlemen
that write, who can read it without a
good Lexicon. Now, Sir, if we were
to afford Time to find out the true
Meaning of Words, a Gentleman would
not get Bread and Cheese by his Work. 
If one was to be paid, indeed, as Mr. 

Pope was for his Homer. Pray, Sir,
don't you think That the best Translation
in the World?’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ cries Booth, ‘I think,
tho’ it is certainly a noble Paraphrase,
and of itself a fine Poem, yet, in some
Places, it is no Translation at all. In the
very Beginning, for Instance, he hath
not rendered the true Force of the Author. 
Homer invokes his Muse in the
five first Lines of the Iliad; and, at the
End of the fifth, he gives his Reason. 

&grD;&grig;&gro;&grst; &grd;&grap; &gres;&grt;&gre;&grl;&gre;&gria;&grt;&gro; &grb;&gro;&gru;&grl;&grha;
‘For all these Things,’ says he, ‘were
brought about by the Decree of Jupiter; 
and, therefore, he supposes their true
Sources are known only to the Deities. 
Now, the Translation takes no more
Notice of the &grD;&grE;, than if no such Word
had been there.’ 
‘Very possibly,’ answered the Author; 
‘it is a long Time since I read the Original. 
Perhaps, then, he followed the
French Translations. I observe, indeed,
he talks much in the Notes of Madam
Dacier and Monsieur Eustathius. 

Booth had now received Conviction
enough of his Friend's Knowledge of the
Greek Language; without attempting,
therefore, to set him right, he made a
sudden Transition to the Latin. ‘Pray,
Sir,’ said he, ‘as you have mentioned
Rowe's Translation of the Pharsalia; 
do you remember, how he hath rendered
that Passage in the Character of
Cato? 

—Venerisque huic maximus Usus
Progenies; urbi Pater est, urbique Maritus.
‘For I apprehend that Passage is generally
misunderstood.’ 
‘I really do not remember,’ answered
the Author. –––‘Pray, Sir, what do you
take to be the Meaning?’ 
‘I apprehend, Sir,’ replied Booth,
‘that, by these Words, Urbi Pater est,
Urbique Maritus, Cato is represented as
the Father and Husband to the City of
Rome.’ 
‘Very true, Sir,’ cries the Author,
‘very fine, indeed. –––Not only the Father 

of his Country, but the Husband
too; very noble, truly.’ 
‘Pardon me, Sir,’ cries Booth, ‘I do
not conceive that to have been Lucan's
Meaning. If you please to observe the
Context: Lucan having commended the
Temperance of Cato, in the Instances of
Diet and Clothes, proceeds to venereal
Pleasures; of which, says the Poet, his
principal Use was Procreation: Then
he adds, Urbi Pater est, Urbique Maritus,
That he became a Father and a Husband,
for the Sake only of the City.’ 
‘Upon my Word, that's true,’ cries
the Author, ‘I did not think of it. It
is much finer than the other. –––Urbis
Pater est–––what is the other?–––ay––– 
Urbis Maritus. –––It is certainly as you
say, Sir.’ 
Booth was, by this, pretty well satisfied
of the Author's profound Learning; 
however, he was willing to try him a little
further. He asked him, therefore, what
was his Opinion of Lucan in general, and
in what Class of Writers he ranked him. 

The Author stared a little at this Question; 
and after some Hesitation, answered,
‘Certainly, Sir, I think he is a fine Writer,
and a very great Poet.’ 
‘I am very much of the same Opinion,
cries Booth; but where do you class him,
next to what Poet do you place him?’ 
‘Let me see,’ cries the Author, ‘where
do I class him! next to whom do I place
him! –––Ay!–––why!–––why, pray, where
do you yourself place him?’ 
‘Why, surely,’ cries Booth, ‘if he is
not to be placed in the first Rank, with
Homer, and Virgil, and Milton–––I think
clearly, he is at the Head of the second; 
before either Statius, or Silius Italicus. ––– 
Tho' I allow to each of these their Merits; 
but, perhaps, an Epic Poem was
beyond the Genius of either. I own I
have often thought, if Statius had ventured
no farther than Ovid or Claudian,
he would have succeeded better: For
his Sylvæ are, in my Opinion, much
better than his Thebaïs.’ 

‘I believe I was of the same Opinion
formerly,’ said the Author. 
‘And for what Reason have you altered
it?’ cries Booth. 
‘I have not altered it,’ answered the
Author; ‘but, to tell you the Truth, I
have not any Opinion at all about these
Matters at present. I do not trouble my
Head much with Poetry: For there is
no Encouragement to such Studies in
this Age. It is true, indeed, I have
now and then wrote a Poem or two for
the Magazines; but I never intend to
write any more: For a Gentleman is not
paid for his Time. A Sheet is a Sheet with
the Booksellers; and, whether it be in
Prose or Verse, they make no Difference; 
tho' certainly there is as much Difference
to a Gentleman in the Work, as there is to
a Taylor, between making a plain and a
laced Suit. Rhimes are difficult Things; 
they are stubborn Things, Sir. I have
been sometimes longer in tagging a
Couplet, than I have been in writing a
Speech on the Side of the Opposition,
which hath been read with great Applause
all over the Kingdom.’ 

‘I am glad you are pleased to confirm
that,’ cries Booth: ‘For I protest, it
was an entire Secret to me till this Day. 
I was so perfectly ignorant, that I thought
the Speeches, published in the Magazines,
were really made by the Members
themselves.’ 
‘Some of them, and I believe I may,
without Vanity, say, the best,’ cries the
Author, ‘are all the Production of my
own Pen; but, I believe, I shall leave
it off soon, unless a Sheet of Speech will
fetch more than it does at present. In
Truth, the Romance Writing is the
only Branch of our Business now, that
is worth following. Goods of that Sort
have had so much Success lately in the
Market, that a Bookseller scarce cares
what he bids for them. And it is certainly
the easiest Work in the World; 
you may write it almost as fast as you
can set Pen to Paper; and if you interlard
it with a little Scandal, a little
Abuse on some living Characters of
Note, you cannot fail of Success.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Sir,’ cries Booth,
‘you have greatly instructed me. I could 

not have imagined, there had been so
much Regularity in the Trade of Writing,
as you are pleased to mention; by
what I can perceive, the Pen and Ink is
likely to become the Staple Commodity
of the Kingdom.’ 
‘Alas! Sir,’ answered the Author,
‘it is over-stocked––The Market is over-stocked. 
There is no Encouragement to
Merit, no Patrons. I have been these
five Years soliciting a Subscription for
my new Translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses,
with Notes explanatory, historical,
and critical; and I have scarce
collected five hundred Names yet.’ 
The Mention of this Translation a little
surprised Booth; not only as the Author
had just declared his Intentions to forsake
the tuneful Muses; but for some other
Reasons, which he had collected from his
Conversation with our Author, he little
expected to hear of a Proposal to translate
any of the Latin Poets. He proceeded,
therefore, to catechise him a little farther; 
and by his Answers was fully satisfied,
that he had the very same Acquaintance
with Ovid, that he had appeared to have
with Lucan. 

The Author then pulled out a Bundle of
Papers, containing Proposals for his Subscription,
and Receipts; and addressing
himself to Booth, said, ‘Tho' the Place
in which we meet, Sir, is an improper
Place to solicit Favours of this Kind; 
yet, perhaps, it may be in your Power
to serve me, if you will charge your
Pockets with some of these.’ Booth was
just offering at an Excuse, when the Bailiff
introduced Colonel James, and the Serjeant. 
The unexpected Visit of a beloved
Friend to a Man in Affliction, especially in
Mr. Booth's Situation, is a Comfort which
can scarce be equalled; not barely from
the Hopes of Relief, or Redress, by his
Assistance; but, as it is an Evidence of
sincere Friendship, which scarce admits
of any Doubt or Suspicion. Such an Instance
doth, indeed, make a Man amends
for all ordinary Troubles and Distresses; 
and we ought to think ourselves Gainers,
by having had such an Opportunity of
discovering, that we are possessed of one
of the most valuable of all human Possessions. 

Booth was so transported at the Sight of
the Colonel, that he dropt the Proposals
which the Author had put into his Hand,
and burst forth into the highest Professions
of Gratitude to his Friend, who behaved
very properly on his Side, and said every
Thing which became the Mouth of a
Friend on the Occasion. 
It is true, indeed, he seemed not moved
equally, either with Booth or the Serjeant; 
both whose Eyes watered at the Scene. 
In Truth, the Colonel, tho' a very generous
Man, had not the least Grain of
Tenderness in his Disposition. His Mind
was formed of those firm Materials, of
which Nature formerly hammered out the
Stoic, and upon which the Sorrows of
no Man living could make an Impression. 
A Man of this Temper, who doth not
much value Danger, will fight for the
Person he calls his Friend; and the Man
that hath but little Value for his Money
will give it him; but such Friendship is
never to be absolutely depended on: For
whenever the favourite Passion interposes
with it, it is sure to subside and vanish into
Air. Whereas, the Man, whose tender
Disposition really feels the Miseries of 

another, will endeavour to relieve them
for his own Sake; and, in such a Mind,
Friendship will often get the Superiority
over every other Passion. 
But from whatever Motive it sprung,
the Colonel's Behaviour to Booth seemed
truly amiable; and so it appeared to the
Author, who took the first Occasion to
applaud it in a very florid Oration; which
the Reader, when he recollects that he was
a Speech-maker by Profession, will not be
surprised at; nor, perhaps, will be much
more surprised, that he soon after took an
Occasion of clapping a Proposal into the
Colonel's Hands; holding at the same
Time a Receipt very visible in his own. 
The Colonel received both, and gave
the Author a Guinea in Exchange, which
was double the Sum mentioned in the Receipt; 
for which the Author made a low
Bow, and very politely took his Leave,
saying, ‘I suppose, Gentlemen, you may
have some private Business together; I
heartily wish a speedy End to your Confinement; 
and I congratulate you on the
possessing so great, so noble, and so generous
a Friend.’ 




Which inclines rather to Satir than Panegyric. 
The Colonel had the Curiosity to
ask Booth the Name of the Gentleman,
who, in the vulgar Language, had
struck, or taken him in for a Guinea, with
so much Ease and Dexterity. Booth answered,
he did not know his Name; all
that he knew of him was, that he was the
most impudent and illiterate Fellow he
had ever seen; and that, by his own Account,
he was the Author of most of the
wonderful Productions of the Age. ‘Perhaps,’ 
said he, ‘it may look uncharitable
in me, to blame you for your Generosity; 
but I am convinced the Fellow
hath not the least Merit or Capacity; 
and you have subscribed to the most
horrid Trash that ever was published.’ 
‘I care not a Farthing what he publishes,’ 
cries the Colonel. ‘Heaven
forbid, I should be obliged to read half
the Nonsense I have subscribed to.’ 

‘But, don't you think,’ said Booth,
‘that by such indiscriminate Encouragement
of Authors, you do a real Mischief
to the Society? By propagating
the Subscriptions of such Fellows, People
are tired out, and with-hold their
Contributions to Men of real Merit; 
and, at the same Time, you are contributing
to fill the World, not only with
Nonsense, but with all the Scurrility,
Indecency, and Profaneness with which
the Age abounds; and with which all
bad Writers supply the Defect of Genius.’ 
‘Pugh!’ cries the Colonel, ‘I never
consider these Matters. Good or bad,
it is all one to me; but I have an Acquaintance
of mine, and a Man of great
Wit too, that thinks the worst the best,
as they are the surest to make him
laugh.’ 
‘I ask Pardon, Sir,’ says the Serjeant; 
‘but I wish your Honour would consider
your own Affairs a little; for it grows
late in the Evening.’ 

‘The Serjeant says true,’ answered the
Colonel. ‘What is it you intend to
do?’ 
‘Faith, Colonel, I know not what I
shall do. My Affairs seem so irreparable,
that I have been driving them, as
much as possibly I could from my Mind. 
If I was to suffer alone, I think, I could
bear them with some Philosophy; but
when I consider who are to be the Sharers
in my Fortune–––the dearest of Children; 
and the best, the worthiest, and
the noblest of Women. Pardon me,
my dear Friend, these Sensations are
above me, they convert me into a Woman; 
they drive me to Despair, to
Madness.’ 
The Colonel advised him to command
himself; and told him, this was not the
Way to retrieve his Fortune. ‘As to me,
my dear Booth,’ said he, ‘you know,
you may command me as far as is really
within my Power.’ 
Booth answered eagerly, that he was so
far from expecting any more Favours from
the Colonel, that he had resolved not to 

let him know any Thing of his Misfortune. 
‘No, my dear Friend,’ cries he,
‘I am too much obliged to you already;’ 
and then burst into many fervent Expressions
of Gratitude; till the Colonel himself
stopt him, and begged him to give an Account
of the Debt or Debts, for which he
was detained in that horrid Place. 
Booth answered, he could not be very
exact; but he feared it was upwards of
four hundred Pounds. 
‘It is but three hundred Pounds, indeed,
Sir,’ cries the Serjeant; ‘if you
can raise three hundred Pounds, you
are a free Man this Moment.’ 
Booth, who did not apprehend the generous
Meaning of the Serjeant, as well
as, I believe, the Reader will, answered,
he was mistaken; that he had computed
his Debts, and they amounted to upwards
of four hundred Pounds: Nay, that the
Bailiff had shewn him Writs for above
that Sum. 
‘Whether your Debts are three or four
hundred,’ cries the Colonel, ‘the present
Business is to give Bail only; and 

then you will have some time to try your
Friends. I think you might get a Company
abroad; and then I would advance
the Money on the Security of half your
Pay: And, in the mean Time, I will
be one of your Bail with all my Heart.’ 
Whilst Booth poured forth his Gratitude
for all this Kindness, the Serjeant
ran down Stairs for the Bailiff; and shortly
after returned with him into the Room. 
The Bailiff, being informed that the
Colonel offered to be Bail for his Prisoner,
answered a little surlily, ‘Well, Sir,
and who will be the other? You know,
I suppose, there must be two; and I
must have Time to enquire after them.’ 
The Colonel replied, ‘I believe, Sir,
I am well known to be responsible for a
much larger Sum than your Demand on
this Gentleman; but if your Forms require
two, I suppose the Serjeant here
will do for the other.’ 
‘I don't know the Serjeant, nor you
either, Sir,’ cries Bondum; ‘and if you
propose yourselves Bail for the Gentleman, 

man, I must have Time to enquire after
you.’ 
‘You need very little Time to enquire
after me,’ says the Colonel; for I can
send for several of the Law, whom I
suppose you know, to satisfy you; ‘but
consider it is very late.’ 
‘Yes, Sir,’ answered Bondum, ‘I do
consider it is too late for the Captain to
be bailed To-night.’ 
‘What do you mean by too late?’ 
cries the Colonel. 
‘I mean, Sir, that I must search the
Office, and that is now shut up: For
if my Lord Mayor and the Court of
Aldermen would be bound for him, I
would not discharge him, till I had
searched the Office.’ 
‘How, Sir,’ cries the Colonel, ‘hath
the Law of England no more Regard
for the Liberty of the Subject, than to
suffer such Fellows as you to detain a
Man in Custody for Debt, when he can
give undeniable Security?’ 

‘Don't Fellow me,’ said the Bailiff,
‘I am as good a Fellow as yourself, I
believe, tho' you have that Ribbond in
your Hat there.’ 
‘Do you know who you are speaking
to?’ said the Serjeant. ‘Do you know
you are talking to a Colonel of the
Army?’ 
‘What's a Colonel of the Army to
me!’—cries the Bailiff. ‘I have had
as good as he in my Custody before
now.’ 
‘And a Member of Parliament’— 
cries the Serjeant. 
‘Is the Gentleman a Member of Parliament? 
—Well, and what Harm
have I said—I am sure I meant no
Harm, and if his Honour is offended,
I ask his Pardon; to be sure his Honour
must know that the Sheriff is answerable
for all the Writs in the Office, tho'
they were never so many, and I am answerable
to the Sheriff. I am sure the
Captain can't say that I have shewn him
any Manner of Incivility since he hath 

been here. —And I hope, honourable
Sir,’ cries he turning to the Colonel,
‘you don't take any thing amiss that I
said, or meant by way of Disrespect, or
any such Matter. I did not, indeed, as
the Gentleman here says, know who I was
speaking to; but I did not say any thing
uncivil as I know of, and I hope no
Offence.’ 
The Colonel was more easily pacified
than might have been expected, and told
the Bailiff that if it was against the Rules
of Law to discharge Mr. Booth that Evening,
he must be contented. He then addressed
himself to his Friend, and began
to prescribe Comfort and Patience to him; 
saying he must rest satisfied with his Confinement
that Night, and the next Morning
he promised to visit him again. 
Booth answered, that as for himself,
the lying one Night in any Place was very
little worth his Regard. ‘You and I,
my dear Friend, have both spent our
Evening in a worse Situation than I
shall in this House. All my Concern
is for my poor Amelia, whose Sufferings
on Account of my Absence I know, and
I feel with unspeakable Tenderness. 

Could I be assured she was tolerably
easy, I could be contented in Chains or
in a Dungeon.’ 
‘Give yourself no Concern on her Account,’ 
said the Colonel, ‘I will wait
on her myself, tho' I break an Engagement
for that Purpose, and will give
her such Assurances as I am convinced
will make her perfectly easy.’ 
Booth embraced his Friend, and weeping
over him paid his Acknowledgment
with Tears, for all his Goodness. In
Words, indeed, he was not able to thank
him; for Gratitude joining with his other
Passions almost choaked him, and stopt
his Utterance. 
After a short Scene, in which nothing
past worth recounting, the Colonel bid
his Friend Good-Night; and leaving the
Serjeant with him made the best of his
Way back to Amelia. 




Worthy a very serious Perusal. 
The Colonel found Amelia sitting
very disconsolate with Mrs. Atkinson. 
He entered the Room with an Air of great
Gaiety, assured Amelia that her Husband
was perfectly well, and that he hoped the
next Day he would again be with her. 
Amelia was a little comforted at this
Account; and vented many grateful Expressions
to the Colonel, for his unparallelled
Friendship, as she was pleased to
call it. She could not, however, help
giving Way soon after to a Sigh, at the
Thoughts of her Husband's Bondage,
and declared that Night would be the
longest she had ever known. 
‘This Lady, Madam,’ cries the Colonel,
‘must endeavour to make it shorter. 
And if you will give me Leave, I will
join in the same Endeavour.’ Then after
some more consolatory Speeches, the Colonel
attempted to give a gay Turn to
the Discourse; and said, ‘I was engaged
to have spent this Evening disagreeably
at Ranelagh, with a Set of Company I 

did not like. How vastly am I obliged
to you, dear Mrs. Booth, that I pass it
so infinitely more to my Satisfaction!’ 
‘Indeed, Colonel,’ said Amelia, ‘I
am convinced that to a Mind so rightly
turned as yours, there must be a much
sweeter Relish in the highest Offices of
Friendship, than in any Pleasures which
the gayest public Places can afford.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Madam,’ said the
Colonel, ‘You now do me more than
Justice. I have, and always had the
utmost Indifference for such Pleasures. 
Indeed, I hardly allow them worthy of
that Name, or if they are so at all, it is
in a very low Degree. In my Opinion,
the highest Friendship must always lead
us to the highest Pleasure.’ 
Here Amelia entered into a long Dissertation
on Friendship, in which she pointed
several Times directly at the Colonel as
the Hero of her Tale. 
The Colonel highly applauded all her
Sentiments; and when he could not avoid
taking the Compliment to himself, he received
it with a most respectful Bow. 

He then tried his Hand likewise at Description,
in which he found Means to
repay all Amelia's Panegyric in Kind. 
This tho' he did with all possible Delicacy; 
yet a curious Observer might have
been apt to suspect that it was chiefly on
her Account that the Colonel had avoided
the Masquerade. 
In Discourses of this Kind they past the
Evening, till it was very late, the Colonel
never offering to stir from his Chair before
the Clock had struck one; when he
thought, perhaps, that Decency obliged
him to take his Leave. 
As soon as he was gone, Mrs. Atkinson
said to Mrs. Booth, ‘I think, Madam,
you told me this Afternoon, that the
Colonel was married.’ 
Amelia answered, she did so. 
‘I think likewise, Madam,’ said Mrs.
Atkinson, ‘you was acquainted with the
Colonel's Lady.’ 
Amelia answered, that she had been extremely
intimate with her Abroad. 

‘Is she young, and handsome,’ said
Mrs. Atkinson, ‘In short, pray, was it a
Match of Love or Convenience?’ 
Amelia answered, entirely of Love, she
believed, on his Side: For that the Lady
had little or no Fortune. 
‘I am very glad to hear it,’ said Mrs.
Atkinson: ‘For I am sure the Colonel is
in Love with somebody. I think, I
never saw a more luscious Picture of
Love drawn than that which he was
pleased to give us, as the Portraiture
of Friendship. I have read, indeed, of
Pylades and Orestes, Damon and Pythias,
and other great Friends of old; nay, I
sometimes flatter myself that I am capable
of being a Friend myself; but as
for that fine, soft, tender, delicate Passion,
which he was pleased to describe,
I am convinced there must go a He
and a She to the Composition.’ 
‘Upon my Word, my Dear, you are
mistaken,’ cries Amelia. ‘If you had
known the Friendship which hath always
subsisted between the Colonel and
my Husband, you would not imagine 

it possible for any Description to exceed
it. Nay, I think his Behaviour this
very Day is sufficient to convince you.’ 
‘I own what he hath done To-day
hath great Merit,’ said Mrs. Atkinson; 
‘and yet from what he hath said To-night
—You will pardon me, dear Madam; 
perhaps I am too quick-sighted in my
Observations, nay, I am afraid I am
even impertinent.’ 
‘Fie! upon it,’ cries Amelia, ‘how
can you talk in that Strain? Do you
imagine I expect Ceremony. —Pray
speak what you think with the utmost
Freedom.’ 
‘Did he not then,’ said Mrs. Atkinson,
‘repeat the Words, the finest Woman in
the World, more than once? Did he
not make use of an Expression which
might have become the Mouth of Oroondates
himself? —If I remember, the
Words were these, “That had he been
Alexander the Great, he should have
thought it more Glory to have wiped
off a Tear from the bright Eyes of
Statira, than to have conquered Fifty
Worlds.”’ 

‘Did he say so?’ cries Amelia—‘I
think he did say something like it; but
my Thoughts were so full of my Husband
that I took little Notice. But what
would you infer from what he said? I
hope you don't think he is in Love
with me!’ 
‘I hope he doth not think so himself,’ 
answered Mrs. Atkinson, ‘tho' when he
mentioned the bright Eyes of Statira, he
fixed his own Eyes on yours with the
most languishing Air I ever beheld.’ 
Amelia was going to answer, when the
Serjeant arrived, and then she immediately
fell to enquiring after her Husband; and received
such satisfactory Answers to all her
many Questions concerning him, that she
expressed great Pleasure. These Ideas so
possessed her Mind, that without once
casting her Thoughts on any other Matters,
she took her Leave of the Serjeant and
his Lady, and repaired to bed to her
Children, in a Room which Mrs. Atkinson
had provided her in the same House; 
where we will at present wish her a good
Night. 




Consisting of grave Matters. 
While Innocence and chearful
Hope, in spite of the Malice of
Fortune, closed the Eyes of the gentle Amelia,
on her homely Bed, and she enjoyed
a sweet and profound Sleep; the Colonel
lay restless all Night on his Down: 
His Mind was affected with a kind of
Ague Fit; sometimes scorched up with
flaming Desires, and again chilled with the
coldest Despair. 
There is a Time, I think, according to
one of our Poets, When Lust and Envy
sleep. This, I suppose, is when they are
well gorged with the Food they most delight
in; but while either of these are
hungry, 

Nor Poppy, nor Mandragora
Nor all the drousy Syrups of the East
Will ever medicine them to Slumber.
The Colonel was, at present, unhappily
tormented by both these Fiends. His last
Evening's Conversation with Amelia had 

done his Business effectually. The many
kind Words she had spoken to him, the
many kind Looks she had given him, as
being, she conceived, the Friend and Preserver
of her Husband, had made an entire
Conquest of his Heart. Thus, the very
Love which she bore him, as the Person to
whom her little Family were to owe their
Preservation and Happiness, inspired him
with Thoughts of sinking them all in the
lowest Abyss of Ruin and Misery; and
while she smiled with all her Sweetness on
the supposed Friend of her Husband, she
was converting that Friend into his most
bitter Enemy. 

Friendship take heed, if Woman interfere,
Be sure the Hour of thy Destruction's near.
These are the Lines of Vanbrugh; and
the Sentiment is better than the Poetry. 
To say the Truth, as a handsome Wife is
the Cause and Cement of many false Friendships,
she is often too liable to destroy the
real ones. 
Thus the Object of the Colonel's Lust
very plainly appears; but the Object of
his Envy may be more difficult to discover. 
Nature and Fortune had seemed to 

strive with a kind of Rivalship, which
should bestow most on the Colonel. The
former had given him Person, Parts, and
Constitution, in all which he was superior
to almost every other Man. The latter
had given him Rank in Life, and Riches,
both in a very eminent Degree. Whom
then should this happy Man envy? Here,
lest Ambition should mislead the Reader
to search the Palaces of the Great, we will
direct him at once to Gray's-Inn-Lane; 
where in a miserable Bed, in a miserable
Room, he will see a miserable broken Lieutenant,
in a miserable Condition, with several
heavy Debts on his Back, and without
a Penny in his Pocket. This, and no
other, was the Object of the Colonel's Envy. 
And why? because this Wretch was
possessed of the Affections of a poor little
Lamb; which all the vast Flocks that
were within the Power and Reach of the
Colonel, could not prevent that Glutton's
longing for. And sure this Image of the
Lamb is not improperly adduced on this
Occasion: For what was the Colonel's Desire
but to lead this poor Lamb, as it
were, to the Slaughter, in order to purchase
a Feast of a few Days by her final
Destruction, and to tear her away from
the Arms of one where she was sure of 

being fondled and caressed all the Days of
her Life. 
While the Colonel was agitated with
these Thoughts, his greatest Comfort was,
that Amelia and Booth were now separated,
and his greatest Terror was of their coming
again together. From Wishes therefore
he began to meditate Designs; and so far
was he from any Intention of procuring
the Liberty of his Friend, that he began to
form Schemes of prolonging his Confinement,
till he could procure some Means
of sending him away far from her; in
which Case he doubted not but of succeeding
in all he desired. 
He was forming this Plan in his Mind,
when a Servant informed him, that one
Serjeant Atkinson desired to speak with his
Honour. The Serjeant was immediately
admitted, and acquainted the Colonel, that
if he pleased to go and become Bail for
Mr. Booth, another unexceptionable Housekeeper
would be there to join with him. 
This Person the Serjeant had procured that
Morning, and had, by Leave of his Wife,
given him a Bond of Indemnification for
the Purpose. 

The Colonel did not seem so elated with
this News as Atkinson expected. On the
contrary, instead of making a direct Answer
to what Atkinson said, the Colonel began
thus: ‘I think, Serjeant, Mr. Booth
hath told me that you was Foster-Brother
to his Lady. She is really a charming
Woman, and it is a thousand Pities
she should ever have been placed in the
dreadful Situation she is now in. There
is nothing so silly as for Subaltern Officers
of the Army to marry, unless where
they meet with Women of very great
Fortunes indeed. What can be the Event
of their marrying otherwise, but entailing
Misery and Beggary on their Wives
and their Posterity?’ 
‘Ah! Sir!’ cries the Serjeant, ‘it is too
late to think of those Matters now. To
be sure my Lady might have married
one of the top Gentlemen in the Country: 
For she is certainly one of the best,
as well as one of the handsomest, Women
in the Kingdom; and if she had
been fairly dealt by, would have had a
very great Fortune into the Bargain. Indeed
she is worthy of the greatest Prince
in the World; and if I had been the 

greatest Prince in the World, I should
have thought myself happy with such
a Wife; but she was pleased to like
the Lieutenant, and certainly there can
be no Happiness in Marriage without
Liking.’ 
‘Lookee, Serjeant,’ said the Colonel,
‘you know very well that I am the Lieutenant's
Friend. I think I have shewn
myself so.’ 
‘Indeed, your Honour hath,’ quoth the
Serjeant, ‘more than once, to my Knowledge.’ 
‘But I am angry with him for his Imprudence,
greatly angry with him for
his Imprudence; and the more so, as it
affects a Lady of so much Worth.’ 
‘She is, indeed, a Lady of the highest
Worth,’ cries the Serjeant. ‘Poor dear
Lady, I knew her, an't please your
Honour, from her Infancy; and the
sweetest-temper'd, best-natured Lady she
is, that ever trod on English Ground. I
have always loved her as if she was my
own Sister. —Nay, she hath very often
called me Brother; and I have taken it 

to be a greater Honour than if I was to
be called a General Officer.’ 
‘What Pity it is,’ said the Colonel,
‘that this worthy Creature should be exposed
to so much Misery by the thoughtless
Behaviour of a Man, who, though
I am his Friend, I cannot help saying,
hath been guilty of Imprudence, at least. 
Why could he not live upon his Half-pay? 
What had he to do to run himself
into Debt in this outrageous Manner?’ 
‘I wish indeed,’ cries the Serjeant, ‘he
had been a little more considerative; 
but, I hope, this will be a Warning to
him.’ 
‘How am I sure of that,’ answered the
Colonel; ‘or what Reason is there to expect
it? Extravagance is a Vice of which
Men are not so easily cured. I have
thought a great deal of this Matter,
Mr. Serjeant; and upon the most mature
Deliberation, I am of Opinion, that
it will better both for him and his poor
Lady, that he should smart a little
more.’ 

‘Your Honour, Sir, to be sure is in
the Right,’ reply'd the Serjeant; ‘but
yet, Sir, if you will pardon me for speaking,
I hope you will be pleased to consider
my poor Lady's Case. She suffers,
all this while, as much or more than the
Lieutenant; for I know her so well, that
I am certain she will never have a Moment's
Ease till her Husband is out of
Confinement.’ 
‘I know Women better than you, Serjeant,’ 
cries the Colonel: They sometimes
place their Affections on a Husband,
as Children do on their Nurse; but
they are both to be weaned. I know
you, Serjeant, to be a Fellow of Sense as
well as Spirit, or I should not speak so
freely to you; but I took a Fancy to you
a long time ago, and I intend to serve
you; but first I ask you this Question,
is your Attachment to Mr. Booth, or to
his Lady?’ 
‘Certainly, Sir,’ said the Serjeant, ‘I
must love my Lady best. Not but I
have a great Affection for the Lieutenant
too, because I know my Lady hath
the same; and, indeed, he hath been always 

very good to me, as far as was
in his Power. A Lieutenant, your Honour
knows, can't do a great deal; but
I have always found him my Friend upon
all Occasions.’ 
‘You say true,’ cries the Colonel, ‘a
Lieutenant can do but little; but I can
do much to serve you, and will too— 
But let me ask you one Question—Who
was the Lady whom I saw last Night
with Mrs. Booth at her Lodgings?’ 
Here the Serjeant blushed, and repeated,
‘The Lady, Sir!’ 
‘Ay, a Lady, a Woman,’ cries the Colonel,
‘who supped with us last Night. 
She looked rather too much like a Gentlewoman
for the Mistress of a Lodging
House.’ 
The Serjeant's Cheeks glowed at this
Compliment to his Wife, and he was just
going to own her, when the Colonel proceeded. 
‘I think I never saw in my Life
so ill-looking, fly, demure a B&wblank; I
would give something, methinks, to
know who she was.’ 

‘I don't know, indeed,’ cries the Serjeant
in great Confusion. —‘I know nothing
about her.’ 
‘I wish you would enquire,’ said the
Colonel, ‘and let me know her Name,
and likewise what she is. I have a strange
Curiosity to know, and let me see you
again this Evening exactly at Seven.’ 
‘And will not your Honour then go to
the Lieutenant this Morning?’ said Atkinson. 
‘It is not in my Power,’ answered the
Colonel: ‘I am engaged another Way. 
Besides there is no Haste in this Affair. 
If Men will be imprudent, they must
suffer the Consequences. Come to me
at Seven, and bring me all the Particulars
you can concerning that ill-look'd
Jade, I mentioned to you; for I am resolved
to know who she is. And so,
Good-morrow to you Serjeant; be assured
I will take an Opportunity to do something
for you.’ 
Tho' some Readers may, perhaps, think
the Serjeant not unworthy of the Freedom 

with which the Colonel treated him, yet
that haughty Officer would have been very
backward to have condescended to such
Familiarity with one of his Rank, had he
not proposed some Design from it. In
Truth, he began to conceive Hopes of
making the Serjeant instrumental to his
Design on Amelia; in other Words, to convert
him into a Pimp; an Office in which
the Colonel had been served by Atkinson's
Betters; and which, as he knew it was in
his Power very well to reward him, he
had no Apprehension that the Serjeant
would decline: An Opinion which the
Serjeant might have pardon'd, though he
had never given the least Grounds for it,
since the Colonel borrowed it from the
Knowledge of his own Heart. This dictated
to him, that he, from a bad Motive,
was capable of desiring to debauch his
Friend's Wife; and the same Heart inspired
him to hope that another from
another bad Motive, might be guilty of the
same Breach of Friendship, in assisting him. 
Few Men, I believe, think better of others
than of themselves; nor do they easily allow
the Existence of any Virtue of which they
perceive no Traces in their own Minds: 
For which Reason I have observed, that it
is extremely difficult to persuade a Rogue 

that you are an honest Man; nor would
you ever succeed in the Attempt by the
strongest Evidence, was it not for the comfortable
Conclusion which the Rogue draws,
that he who proves himself to be honest,
proves himself to be a Fool at the same
time. 



A curious Chapter, from which a curious
Reader may draw sundry Observations. 
The Serjeant retired from the Colonel
in a very dejected State of Mind; 
in which, however, we must leave him
awhile, and return to Amelia; who, as
soon as she was up, had dispatched Mrs.
Atkinson to pay off her former Lodgings,
and to bring off all Cloaths and other
Moveables. 
The trusty Messenger returned without
performing her Errand: For Mrs. Ellison
had locked up all her Rooms, and was
gone out very early that Morning, and
the Servant knew not whither she was
gone. 

The two Ladies now sat down to Breakfast,
together with Amelia's two Children; 
after which Amelia declared she would take
a Coach and visit her Husband. To this
Motion Mrs. Atkinson soon agreed, and
offered to be her Companion. To say
Truth, I think it was reasonable enough; 
and the great Abhorrence which Booth had
of seeing his Wife in a Bailiff's House,
was, perhaps, rather too nice and delicate. 
When the Ladies were both drest, and
just going to send for their Vehicle, a great
Knocking was heard at the Door, and presently
Mrs. James was usher'd into the
Room. 
This Visit was disagreeable enough to
Amelia, as it detained her from the Sight
of her Husband, for which she so eagerly
longed. However, as she had no Doubt
but that the Visit would be reasonably short,
she resolved to receive the Lady with all
the Complaisance in her Power. 
Mrs. James now behaved herself so very
unlike the Person that she lately appeared,
that it might have surprised any 

one who doth not know, that besides that
of a fine Lady, which is all mere Art and
Mummery, every such Woman hath some
real Character at the Bottom, in which,
whenever Nature gets the better of her, she
act. Thus the finest Ladies in the World
will sometimes love, and sometimes scratch,
according to their different natural Dispositions,
with great Fury and Violence, tho'
both of these are equally inconsistent with
a fine Lady's artificial Character. 
Mrs. James then was at the Bottom a
very good-natured Woman; and the Moment
she heard of Amelia's Misfortune,
was sincerely grieved at it. She had acquiesced
on the very first Motion with the
Colonel's Design of inviting her to her
House; and this Morning at Breakfast,
when he had acquainted her that Amelia
made some Difficulty in accepting the Offer,
very readily undertook to go herself
and persuade her Friend to accept the Invitation. 
She now pressed this Matter with such
Earnestness, that Amelia, who was not
extremely versed in the Art of denying,
was hardly able to refuse her Importunity; 
nothing, indeed, but her Affection to Mrs. 

Atkinson could have prevailed on her to
refuse; that Point, however, she would
not give up, and Mrs. James, at last, was
contented with a Promise, that as soon as
their Affairs were settled, Amelia, with her
Husband and Family, would make her a
Visit, and stay some time with her in
the Country, whither she was soon to retire. 
Having obtained this Promise, Mrs.
James, after many very friendly Professions,
took her Leave; and stepping into
her Coach, re-assumed the fine Lady, and
drove away to join her Company at an
Auction. 
The Moment she was gone, Mrs. Atkinson,
who had left the Room upon the
Approach of Mrs. James, returned into
it, and was informed by Amelia of all
that had past. 
‘Pray, Madam,’ said Mrs. Atkinson,
‘do this Colonel and his Lady live, as
it is called, well together?’ 
‘If you mean to ask,’ cries Amelia,
‘whether they are a very fond Couple, I
must answer that I believe they are not.’ 

‘I have been told,’ says Mrs. Atkinson,
‘that there have been Instances of Women
who have become Bawds to their
own Husbands, and the Husbands Pimps
for them.’ 
‘Fie upon it,’ cries Amelia. ‘I hope
there are no such People. Indeed, my
Dear, this is being a little too censorious.’ 
‘Call it what you please,’ answered
Mrs. Atkinson. It arises from my Love
to you, and my Fears for your Danger. 
You know the Proverb of a burnt Child; 
and if such a one hath any Good-nature
it will dread the Fire, on the Account of
others as well as on its own. And if I
may speak my Sentiments freely, I cannot
think you will be in Safety at this
Colonel's House.’ 
‘I cannot but believe your Apprehensions
to be sincere,’ replied Amelia, ‘and
I must think myself obliged to you for
them; but I am convinced you are entirely
in an Error. I look on Colonel
James as the most generous and best of
Men. He was a Friend, and an excellent 

Friend too, to my Husband, long
before I was acquainted with him, and
he hath done him a thousand good Offices. 
What do you say of his Behaviour
Yesterday?’ 
‘I wish,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson, ‘that his
Behaviour To-day had been equal. What
I am now going to undertake is the most
disagreeable Office of Friendship, but it
is a necessary one. I must tell you therefore
what past this Morning between the
Colonel and Mr. Atkinson; for tho' it
will hurt you, you ought, on many Accounts
to know it.’ Here she related the
whole which we have recorded in the preceding
Chapter, and with which the Serjeant
had acquainted her, while Mrs. James
was paying her Visit to Amelia. And as
the Serjeant had painted the Matter rather
in stronger Colours than the Colonel; so
Mrs. Atkinson again a little improved on
the Serjeant. Neither of these good People,
perhaps, intended to aggravate any Circumstance; 
but such is, I believe, the unavoidable
Consequence of all Reports. Mrs.
Atkinson, indeed, may be supposed not to
see what related to James in the most favourable
Light, as the Serjeant, with more
Honesty than Prudence, had suggested to 

his Wife, that the Colonel had not the
kindest Opinion of her, and had called her a
sly and demure—; it is true he omitted ill-looking
B&wblank;; two Words, which are,
perhaps, superior to the Patience of any
Job in Petticoats that ever lived. He
made amends, however, by substituting
some other Phrases in their Stead, not extremely
agreeable to a female Ear. 
It appeared to Amelia, from Mrs. Atkinson's
Relation, that the Colonel had grossly
abused Booth to the Serjeant, and had absolutely
refused to become his Bail. Poor
Amelia became a pale and motionless Statue
at this Account. At length, she cry'd,
‘If this be true, I and mine are all, indeed,
undone. We have no Comfort,
no Hope, no Friend left. —I
cannot disbelieve you. —I know you
would not deceive me. —Why should
you, indeed, deceive me? —But what can
have caused this Alteration since last
Night? —Did I say or do any thing to offend
him?’ 
‘You said and did rather, I believe, a
great deal too much to please him,’ answered
Mrs. Atkinson. ‘Besides, he is not 

in the least offended with you. On the
contrary, he said many kind Things.’–– 
‘What can my poor Love have done?’ 
said Amelia. ‘He hath not seen the Colonel
since last Night. Some Villain
hath set him against my Husband; he
was once before suspicious of such a
Person. Some cruel Monster hath belied
his Innocence.’ 
‘Pardon me, dear Madam,’ said Mrs.
Atkinson, ‘I believe the Person, who hath
injured the Captain with this Friend of
his, is one of the worthiest and best of
Creatures—Nay, do not be surprised; 
the Person I mean, is even your fair
Self: Sure you would not be so dull in
any other Case; but in this, Gratitude,
Humility, Modesty, every Virtue shuts
your Eyes. 

Mortales hebitant visus.
‘as Virgil says. What in the World can
be more consistent, than his Desire to
have you at his own House; and to keep
your Husband confined in another? 
All that he said, and all that he did
Yesterday; and, what is more convincing 

to me than both, all that he looked
last Night, are very consistent with both
these Designs.’ 
‘O Heavens!’ cries Amelia, ‘you
chill my Blood with Horror! The Idea
freezes me to Death: I can not, must
not, will not think it. Nothing but
Conviction–––Heaven forbid, I should
ever have more Conviction! And did
he abuse my Husband! What! did he
abuse a poor, unhappy, distrest Creature; 
opprest, ruined, torn from his
Children, torn away from his wretched
Wife; the honestest, worthiest, noblest,
tenderest, fondest, best!’ –––Here she
burst into an Agony of Grief, which exceeds
the Power of Description. 
In this Situation, Mrs. Atkinson was
doing her utmost to support her, when a
most violent Knocking was heard at the
Door, and immediately the Serjeant ran
hastily into the Room; bringing with him
a Cordial, which presently relieved Amelia. 
What this Cordial was, we shall inform
the Reader in due Time. In the mean
while, he must suspend his Curiosity; 
and the Gentlemen at White's may lay
Wagers, whether it was Ward's Pill, or 

that Powder, for the Invention of which,
my worthy and ingenious Friend Dr.
James would, in almost any Country but
this, have received public Honours and
Rewards. 
But before we close this Chapter, and
return back to the Bailiff's House, we
must do our best to rescue the Character
of our Heroine from the Dulness of Apprehension,
which several of our quick-sighted
Readers may lay more heavily to
her Charge than was done by her Friend
Mrs. Atkinson. 
I must inform, therefore, all such Readers,
that it is not, because Innocence is
more blind than Guilt, that the former
often overlooks and tumbles into the Pit,
which the latter foresees and avoids. The
Truth is, that it is almost impossible Guilt
should miss the discovering of all the
Snares in its Way; as it is constantly prying
closely into every Corner, in order to
lay Snares for others. Whereas Innocence,
having no such Purpose, walks
fearlessly and carelessly through Life; 
and is consequently liable to tread on the
Gins, which Cunning hath laid to entrap
it. To speak plainly, and without Allegory 

or Figure, it is not Want of Sense,
but Want of Suspicion by which Innocence
is often betrayed. Again, we often
admire at the Folly of the Dupe, when we
should transfer our whole Surprize to
the astonishing Guilt of the Betrayer. 
In a Word, many an innocent Person
hath owed his Ruin to this Circumstance
alone, that the Degree of Villany was
such as must have exceeded the Faith of
every Man who was not himself a Villain. 



In which are many profound Secrets of Philosophy. 
Booth, having had enough of the
Author's Company the preceding
Day, chose now another Companion. Indeed
the Author was not very solicitous of
a second Interview: For, as he could have
no Hope from Booth's Pocket, so he was
not likely to receive much Increase to his
Vanity from Booth's Conversation: For,
low as this Wretch was in Virtue, Sense,
Learning, Birth and Fortune, he was by
no Means low in his Vanity. This Passion,
indeed, was so high in him, and at 

the same Time so blinded him to his own
Demerits, that he hated every Man, who
did not either flatter him or give him Money. 
In short, he claimed a strange Kind
of Right; either to cheat all his Acquaintance
of their Praise, or to pick their
Pockets of their Pence; in which latter
Case, he himself repaid very liberally with
Panegyric. 
A very little Specimen of such a Fellow
must have satisfied a Man of Mr.
Booth's Temper. He chose, therefore,
now to associate himself with that Gentleman,
of whom Bondum had given so
shabby a Character. In short, Mr. Booth's
Opinion of the Bailiff was such, that he
recommended a Man most, where he least
intended it. Nay, the Bailiff, in the present
Instance, tho' he had drawn a malicious
Conclusion, honestly avowed, that
this was drawn only from the Poverty of
the Person; which is never, I believe,
any forcible Disrecommendation to a good
Mind: But he must have had a very bad
Mind, indeed, who, in Mr. Booth's Circumstances,
could have disliked or dispised
another Man, because that other
Man was poor. 

Some previous Conversation having past
between this Gentleman and Booth, in
which they had both opened their several
Situations to each other; the former casting
an affectionate Look on the latter, exprest
great Compassion for his Circumstances; 
for which Booth thanking him
said, ‘You must have a great Deal of
Compassion, and be a very good Man,
in such a terrible Situation as you describe
yourself, to have any Pity to spare
for other People.’ 
‘My Affairs, Sir,’ answered the Gentleman,
‘are very bad, it is true; and
yet there is one Circumstance, which
makes you appear to me more the Object
of Pity than I am to myself; and
it is this, that you must from your
Years be a Novice in Affliction; whereas
I have served a long Apprenticeship to
Misery, and ought, by this Time, to
be a pretty good Master of my Trade. 
To say the Truth, I believe, Habit
teaches Men to bear the Burthens of the
Mind, as it enures them to bear heavy
Burthens on their Shoulders. Without
Use and Experience, the strongest
Minds and Bodies both will stagger under 

a Weight, which Habit might render
easy, and even contemptible.’ 
‘There is great Justice,’ cries Booth,
‘in the Comparison; and, I think, I
have myself experienced the Truth of
it: For I am not that Tyro in Affliction
which you seem to apprehend me. And,
perhaps, it is from the very Habit you
mention, that I am able to support my
present Misfortunes a little like a Man.’ 
The Gentleman smiled at this, and
cried, ‘Indeed, Captain, you are a young
Philosopher.’ 
‘I think,’ cries Booth, ‘I have some
Pretensions to that Philosophy which is
taught by Misfortunes; and you seem
to be of Opinion, Sir, that is one of
the best Schools of Philosophy.’ 
‘I mean no more, Sir,’ said the Gentleman,
‘than that in the Days of our
Affliction, we are inclined to think more
seriously, than in those Seasons of Life,
when we are engaged in the hurrying
Pursuits of Business or Pleasure, when
we have neither Leisure nor Inclination
to sift and examine Things to the Bottom. 

Now there are two Considerations,
which, from my having long fixed my
Thoughts upon them, have greatly supported
me under all my Afflictions. 
The one is the Brevity of Life, even at
its longest Duration, which the wisest
of Men hath compared to the short
Dimension of a Span. One of the Roman
Poets compares it to the Duration
of a Race; and another, to the much
shorter Transition of a Wave. 
‘The second Consideration is the Uncertainty
of it. Short as its utmost Limits
are, it is far from being assured of
reaching those Limits. The next Day,
the next Hour, the next Moment may
be the End of our Course. Now of
what Value is so uncertain, so precarious
a Station? This Consideration, indeed,
however lightly it is passed over in our
Conception, doth, in a great Measure,
level all Fortunes and Conditions; and
gives no Man a Right to triumph in the
happiest State, or any Reason to repine
in the most miserable. Would the most
worldly Men see this, in the Light in
which they examine all other Matters,
they would soon feel and acknowledge
the Force of this Way of reasoning: 

For which of them would give any Price
for an Estate, from which they were liable
to be immediately ejected; or,
would they not laugh at him as a Madman,
who accounted himself rich from
such an uncertain Possession! This is
the Fountain, Sir, from which I have
drawn my Philosophy. Hence it is,
that I have learnt to look on all those
Things, which are esteemed the Blessings
of Life, and those which are
dreaded as its Evils, with such a Degree
of Indifference, that as I should not be
elated with possessing the former, so neither
am I greatly dejected and depressed
by suffering the latter. Is the Actor
esteemed happier, to whose Lot it falls
to play the principal Part, than he who
plays the lowest? And yet the Drama
may run twenty Nights together, and
by Consequence may out-last our Lives; 
but, at the best, Life is only a little
longer Drama; and the Business of the
great Stage is consequently a little more
serious than that which is performed at
the Theatre Royal. But even here, the
Catastrophes and Calamities which are
represented, are capable of affecting us. 
The wisest Men can deceive themselves
into feeling the Distresses of a Tragedy, 

tho' they know them to be merely imaginary; 
and Children will often lament
them as Realities: What Wonder then,
if these tragical Scenes, which I allow to
be a little more serious, should a little
more affect us? Where then is the Remedy,
but in the Philosophy I have
mentioned; which, when once by a
long Course of Meditation it is reduced
to a Habit, teaches us to set a just Value
on every Thing; and cures at once all
eager Wishes and abject Fears, all violent
Joy and Grief concerning Objects
which cannot endure long, and may not
exist a Moment.’ 
‘You have exprest yourself extremely
well,’ cries Booth, ‘and I entirely agree
with the Justice of your Sentiments; 
but, however true all this may be in
Theory, I still doubt its Efficacy in
Practice. And the Cause of the Difference
between these two is this; that we
reason from our Heads, but act from
our Hearts. 

—Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor.

‘Nothing can differ more widely than
Wisemen and Fools, in their Estimation
of Things; but as both act from
their uppermost Passion, they both often
act alike. What Comfort then can
your Philosophy give to an avaricious
Man, who is deprived of his Riches; 
or, to an ambitious Man, who is stript
of his Power? To the fond Lover,
who is torn from his Mistress; or, to
the tender Husband, who is dragged
from his Wife? Do you really think,
that any Meditations on the Shortness of
Life will soothe them in their Afflictions? 
Is not this very Shortness itself
one of their Afflictions? And if the
Evil they suffer be a temporary Deprivation
of what they love, will they not
think their Fate the harder, and lament
the more, that they are to lose any Part
of an Enjoyment, to which there is so
short and uncertain a Period?’ 
‘I beg Leave, Sir,’ said the Gentleman,
‘to distinguish here. By Philosophy,
I do not mean the bare Knowledge of
Right and Wrong; but an Energy, a
Habit, as Aristotle calls it; and this I
do firmly believe, with him and with 

the Stoics, is superior to all the Attacks
of Fortune.’ 
He was proceeding, when the Bailiff
came in, and in a surly Tone bad them
both Good-morrow; after which he asked
the Philosopher, if he was prepared to go
to Newgate; for that he must carry him
thither that Afternoon. 
The poor Man seemed very much shocked
with this News. ‘I hope,’ cries he, ‘you
will give me a little longer Time, if not
till the Return of the Writ. But I beg
you particularly, not to carry me thither
To-day: For I expect my Wife and
Children here in the Evening.’ 
‘I have nothing to do with Wives and
Children,’ cried the Bailiff; ‘I never
desire to see any Wives and Children
here. I like no such Company.’ 
‘I intreat you,’ said the Prisoner, ‘give
me another Day. I shall take it as a
great Obligation; and you will disappoint
me in the cruellest Manner in the
World, if you refuse me.’ 

‘I can't help People's Disappointments,’ 
cries the Bailiff, ‘I must consider myself
and my own Family. I know not
where I shall be paid the Money that's
due already. I can't afford to keep
Prisoners at my own Expence.’ 
‘I don't intend it shall be at your Expence,’ 
cries the Philosopher; ‘my
Wife is gone to raise Money this Morning,
and I hope to pay you all I owe you
at her Arrival. But we intend to sup
together To-night at your House; and
if you should remove me now, it would
be the most barbarous Disappointment
to us both, and will make me the most
miserable Man alive.’ 
‘Nay, for my Part,’ said the Bailiff,
‘I don't desire to do any Thing barbarous. 
I know how to treat Gentlemen
with Civility as well as another. And
when People pay as they go, and spend
their Money like Gentlemen, I am sure
no Body can accuse me of any Incivility
since I have been in the Office. And
if you intend to be merry To-night, I
am not the Man that will prevent it––– 
Tho' I say it, you may have as good a 

Supper drest here as at any Tavern in
Town.’ 
‘Since Mr. Bondum is so kind, Captain,’ 
said the Philosopher, ‘I hope for the Favour
of your Company. I assure you,
if it ever be my Fortune to go abroad
into the World, I shall be proud of the
Honour of your Acquaintance.’ 
Indeed, Sir,’ cries Booth, ‘it is an Honour
I shall be very ready to accept; 
but as for this Evening, I cannot help
saying, I hope to be engaged in another
Place.’ 
‘I promise you, Sir,’ answered the
other, ‘I shall rejoice at your Liberty,
tho' I am a Loser by it.’ 
‘Why, as to that Matter,’ cries Bondum
with a Sneer, ‘I fancy, Captain, you
may engage yourself to the Gentleman
without any Fear of breaking your
Word: For I am very much mistaken
if we part To-day.’ 
‘Pardon me, my good Friend,’ said
Booth, ‘but I expect my Bail every Minute.’ 

‘Lookee, Sir,’ cries Bondum, ‘I don't
love to see Gentlemen in an Error. I shall
not take the Serjeant's Bail; and as for
the Colonel, I have been with him myself
this Morning; (for to be sure I love
to do all I can for Gentlemen) and he
told me, he could not possibly be here
To-day: Besides, why should I mince
the Matter? there is more Stuff in the
Office.’ 
‘What do you mean by Stuff?’ cries
Booth. 
‘I mean that there is another Writ,’ 
answered the Bailiff, ‘at the Suit of Mrs.
Ellison, the Gentlewoman that was here
Yesterday; and the Attorney that was
with her, is concerned against you. Some
Officers would not tell you all this; but
I loves to shew Civility to Gentlemen,
while they behave themselves as such. 
And I loves the Gentlemen of the Army
in particular. I had like to have been in
the Army myself once; but I liked the
Commission I have better. Come, Captain,
let not your noble Courage be
cast down; what say you to a Glass of 

white Wine, or a Tiff of Punch, by
Way of Whet?’ 
‘I have told you, Sir, I never drink
in a Morning,’ cries Booth a little peevishly. 
‘No Offence, I hope, Sir,’ said the
Bailiff. ‘I hope I have not treated you
with any Incivility. I don't ask any
Gentleman to call for Liquor in my
House, if he doth not chuse it; nor I
don't desire any Body to stay here longer
than they have a Mind to? –––Newgate,
to be sure is the Place for all Debtors
that can't find Bail. I knows what
Civility is, and I scorn to behave myself
unbecoming a Gentleman; but I'd have
you consider that the twenty-four Hours
appointed by Act of Parliament are almost
out; and so it is time to think of
removing. As to Bail, I would not
have you flatter yourself: For I knows
very well there are other things coming
against you. Besides, the Sum you are
already charged with is very large, and
I must see you in a Place of Safety. My
House is no Prison, tho' I lock up for
a little time in it. Indeed, when Gentlemen
are Gentlemen, and likely to 

find Bail, I don't stand for a Day or
two; but I have a good Nose at a Bit
of Carrion, Captain; I have not carried
so much Carrion to Newgate, without
knowing the Smell of it.’ 
‘I understand not your Cant,’ cries
Booth; ‘but I did not think to have
offended you so much by refusing to
drink in a Morning.’ 
‘Offended me, Sir,’ cries the Bailiff. 
‘Who told you so? Do you think, Sir,
if I want a Glass of Wine I am under
any Necessity of asking my Prisoners for
it? Damn it, Sir, I'll shew you, I scorn
your Words. I can afford to treat you
with a Glass of the best Wine in England,
if you comes to that’—He then
pulled out a Handful of Guineas, saying,
‘There, Sir, they are all my own; I owe
no Body a Shilling. I am no Beggar,
nor no Debtor. I am the King's Officer,
as well as you, and I will spend Guinea
for Guinea as long as you please.’ 
‘Harkee, Rascal,’ cries Booth, laying
hold of the Bailiff's Collar, ‘How dare
you treat me with this Insolence? Doth
the Law give you any Authority to insult 

me in my Misfortunes?’ At which
Words he gave the Bailiff a good Shove,
and threw him from him. 
‘Very well, Sir,’ cries the Bailiff, ‘I
will swear both an Assault and an Attempt
to a Rescue. If Officers are to
be used in this Manner, there is an End
of all Law and Justice. But tho' I am
not a Match for you myself, I have
those below that are.’ He then ran to
the Door, and called up two ill-looking
Fellows, his Followers, whom, as soon as
they entered the Room, he ordered to
seize on Booth, declaring he would immediately
carry him to Newgate; at the
same time pouring out a vast Quantity of
Abuse, below the Dignity of History to
record. 
Booth desired the two dirty Fellows to
stand off, and declared he would make
no Resistance, at the same time bidding
the Bailiff carry him wherever he durst. 
‘I'll shew you what I dare,’ cries the
Bailiff, and again ordered the Followers
to lay hold of their Prisoner, saying,
‘He has assaulted me already, and endeavoured
a Rescue. I shan't trust such a 

Fellow to walk at Liberty. A Gentleman,
indeed! Ay, ay, Newgate is the
properest Place for such Gentry; as arrant
Carrion as ever was carried thither.’ 
The Fellows then both laid violent
Hands on Booth, and the Bailiff stept to
the Door to order a Coach; when on a
sudden, the whole Scene was changed in
an Instant: For now the Serjeant came
running, out of Breath, into the Room; 
and seeing his Friend, the Captain, roughly
handled by two ill-looking Fellows, without
asking any Questions, stept briskly
up to his Assistance, and instantly gave
one of the Assailants so violent a Salute
with his Fist, that he directly measured
his Length on the Floor. 
Booth having by this Means his right
Arm at Liberty was unwilling to be
idle, or entirely to owe his Rescue from
both the Ruffians to the Serjeant; he therefore
imitated the Example which his
Friend had set him, and with a lusty Blow
levelled the other Follower with his Companion
on the Ground. 

The Bailiff roared out, a Rescue, a
Rescue; to which the Serjeant answered,
there was no Rescue intended. ‘The
Captain,’ said he, ‘wants no Rescue. 
Here are some Friends coming who will
deliver him in a better manner.’ 
The Bailiff swore heartily he would
carry him to Newgate, in spite of all the
Friends in the World. 
‘You carry him to Newgate!’ cried
the Serjeant, with the highest Indignation. 
‘Offer but to lay your Hands on him,
and I will knock your Teeth down your
ugly Jaws.’ —Then turning to Booth,
he cried,–––‘They will be all here within
a Minute, Sir, we had much ado to
keep my Lady from coming herself; 
but she is at Home in good Health,
longing to see your Honour; and I
hope you will be with her within this
half Hour.’ 
And now three Gentlemen entered the
Room; these were an Attorney, the Person
whom the Serjeant had procured in
the Morning to be his Bail with Coloned 

James, and lastly, Doctor Harrison himself. 
The Bailiff no sooner saw the Attorney,
with whom he was well acquainted (for
the others he knew not) than he began,
as the Phrase is, to pull in his Horns,
and ordered the two Followers, who were
now got again on their Legs, to walk
down Stairs. 
‘So, Captain,’ says the Doctor, ‘when
last we parted, I believe we neither of
us expected to meet in such a Place as
this.’ 
‘Indeed, Doctor,’ cries Booth, ‘I did
not expect to have been sent hither by
the Gentleman who did me that Favour.’ 
‘How so, Sir?’ said the Doctor, ‘you
was sent hither by some Person, I suppose,
to whom you was indebted. This
is the usual Place, I apprehend, for
Creditors to send their Debtors to. But
you ought to be more surprised that
the Gentleman who sent you hither is
come to release you. –––Mr. Murphy, you
will perform all the necessary Ceremonials.’ 

The Attorney then asked the Bailiff
with how many Actions Booth was charged,
and was informed there were five besides
the Doctor's, which was much the heaviest
of all. Proper Bonds were presently provided,
and the Doctor and the Serjeant's
Friend signed them; the Bailiff, at the
Instance of the Attorney, making no Objection
to the Bail. 
Booth, we may be assured, made a handsome
Speech to the Doctor for such extraordinary
Friendship, with which, however,
we do not think proper to trouble
the Reader; and now every thing being
ended, and the Company ready to depart,
the Bailiff stepped up to Booth, and told
him he hoped he would remember Civility
Money. 
‘I believe,’ cries Booth, ‘you mean
Incivility Money; if there are any Fees
due for Rudeness, I must own you have
a very just Claim.’ 
‘I am sure, Sir,’ cries the Bailiff, ‘I
have treated your Honour with all the
Respect in the World: No Man, I am
sure, can charge me with using a Gentleman 

rudely. I knows what belongs to
a Gentleman better; but you can't deny
that two of my Men have been
knocked down; and I doubt not but as
you are a Gentleman, you will give
them something to drink.’ 
Booth was about to answer with some
Passion, when the Attorney interfered, and
whispered in his Ear, that it was usual to
make a Compliment to the Officer, and
that he had better comply with the
Custom. 
‘If the Fellow had treated me civilly,’ 
answered Booth, ‘I should have had no
Objection to comply with a bad Custom
in his Favour; but I am resolved, I will
never reward a Man for using me ill,
and I will not agree to give him a single
Farthing.’ 
‘'Tis very well, Sir,’ said the Bailiff,
‘I am rightly served for my Good-nature; 
but if it had been to do again, I would
have taken Care you should not have
been bailed this Day.’ 
Doctor Harrison, to whom Booth refered
the Cause, after giving him a succinct 

Account of what had past, declared the
Captain to be in the Right. He said it
was a most horrid Imposition, that such
Fellows were ever suffered to prey on the
Necessitous; but that the Example would
be much worse to reward them where
they had behaved themselves ill. ‘And
I think,’ says he, ‘the Bailiff is worthy
of great Rebuke for what he hath just
now said; in which I hope he hath
boasted of more Power than is in him. 
We do, indeed, with great Justice and
Propriety, value ourselves on our Freedom,
if the Liberty of the Subject depends
on the Pleasure of such Fellows
as these.’ 
‘It is not so neither altogether,’ cries
the Lawyer: ‘But Custom hath established
a Present or Fee to them at the Delivery
of a Prisoner, which they call
Civility Money, and expect as in a
Manner their Due, tho' in Reality they
have no Right.’ 
‘But will any Man,’ cries Doctor Harrison,
‘after what the Captain hath told
us, say that the Bailiff hath behaved
himself as he ought; and if he had, is
he to be rewarded for not acting in an 

unchristian and inhuman Manner? It
is Pity, that instead of a Custom of
seeing them out of the Pockets of the
Poor and Wretched, when they do not
behave themselves ill, there was not both
a Law and a Practice to punish them
severely when they do. In the present
Case, I am so far from agreeing to give
the Bailiff a Shilling, that if there be
any Method of punishing him for his
Rudeness, I shall be heartily glad to see
it put in Execution: For there are none
whose Conduct should be so strictly
watched as that of these necessary Evils
in the Society, as their Office concerns
for the most Part those poor Creatures
who cannot do themselves Justice, and
as they are generally the worst of Men
who undertake it.’ 
The Bailiff then quitted the Room,
muttering that he should know better what
to do another time; and shortly after
Booth and his Friends left the House; but
as they were going out, the Author took
Doctor Harrison aside, and slipt a Receipt
into his Hand, which the Doctor returned,
saying he never subscribed when he neither
knew the Work nor the Author; but that
if he would call at his Lodgings, he would 

be very willing to give all the Encouragement
to Merit which was in his Power. 
The Author took down the Doctor's
Name and Direction, and made
him as many Bows as he would have
done had he carried off the Half Guinea,
for which he had been fishing. 
Mr. Booth then took his Leave of the
Philosopher, and departed with the rest
of his Friends. 