


A Soliloquy of Heartfree's full of
low and base Ideas, without a Syllable
of Greatness. 
Being now alone, he sat some short
Time silent, and then burst forth into
the following Soliloquy: 
“What shall I do? Shall I abandon
myself to a dispirited Despair, or fly in
the Face of the Almighty! Surely both
are unworthy of a wise Man; for what
can be more vain than weakly to lament
my Fortune, if irretrievable, or,
if Hope remains, to offend that Being,
who can most strongly support it: But
are my Passions then voluntary? Am I
so absolutely their Master, that I can
resolve with myself, so far only will I 

grieve? Certainly no. Reason, however
we flatter ourselves, hath not such despotic
Empire in our Minds, that it can,
with imperial Voice, hush all our Sorrow
in a Moment. Where then is its
Use? for either it is an empty Sound,
and we are deceived in thinking we
have Reason, or it is given us to some
End, and hath a Part assigned it by the
All-wise Creator. Why, what can its
Office be, other than justly to weigh
the Worth of all Things, and to direct us
to that Perfection of human Wisdom,
which proportions our Esteem of every
Object by its real Merit, and prevents us
from over or undervaluing whatever we
hope for, we enjoy, or we lose. It doth
not foolishly say to us, be not glad, or
be not sorry, which would be as vain
and idle, as to bid the purling River
cease to run, or the raging Wind to
blow. It prevents us only from exulting,
like Children, when we receive
a Toy, or from lamenting when we are
deprived of it. Suppose then I have lost
the Enjoyments of this World, and my
Expectation of future Pleasure and Profit 

is for ever disappointed; what Relief
can my Reason afford! What, unless
it can shew me I had fixed my Affections
on a Toy; that what I desired
was not, by a wise Man, eagerly to be
affected, nor its Loss violently deplored; 
for there are Toys adapted to all Ages,
from the Rattle to the Throne. And
perhaps the Value of all is equal to their
several Possessors; for if the Rattle
pleases the Ears of the Infant, what can
the Flattery of Sycophants do more to
the Prince. The latter is as far from examining
into the Reality and Source of
his Pleasure as the former; for if both
did, they must both equally despise it. 
And surely if we consider them seriously,
and compare them together, we shall
be forced to conclude all those Pomps
and Pleasures, of which Men are so
fond, and which, through so much
Danger and Difficulty, with such Violence
and Villany they pursue, to be as
worthless Trifles as any exposed to Sale
in a Toyshop. I have often noted my
little Girl viewing, with eager Eyes, a
jointed Baby; I have marked the Pains 

and Solicitations she hath used, till I
have been prevailed on to indulge her
with it. At her first obtaining it, what
Joy hath sparkled in her Countenance!
with what Raptures hath she taken the
Possession; but how little Satisfaction
hath she found in it! What Pains to
work out her Amusement from it! Its
Dress must be varied; the Tinsel Ornaments
which first caught her Eyes,
produce no longer Pleasure; she endeavours
to make it stand and walk in vain,
and is constrained herself to supply it
with Conversation. In a Day's time it
is thrown by and neglected, and some
less costly Toy preferred to it. How
like the Situation of this Child is that
of every Man! What Difficulties in the
Pursuit of his Desires! What Inanity in
the Possession of most, and Satiety in
those which seem more real and substantial! 
The Delights of most Men are
as childish and as superficial as that of
my little Girl; a Feather or a Fiddle are
their Pursuits and their Pleasures through
Life, even to their ripest Years, if such
Men may be said to attain any Ripeness 

at all. But let us survey those whose
Understandings are of a more elevated
and refined Temper, how empty do
they soon find the World of Enjoyments
worth their Desire or attaining! How
soon do they retreat to Solitude and Contemplation,
to Gardening and Planting,
and such rural Amusements, where their
Trees and they enjoy the Air and the
Sun in common, and both vegetate
with very little Difference between them. 
But suppose (which neither Honesty nor
Wisdom will allow) we could admit
something more valuable and substantial
in those Blessings, would not the Uncertainty
of their Possession be alone sufficient
to lower their Price. How mean
a Tenure is that at the Will of Fortune,
which Chance, Fraud, and Rapine are
every Day so likely to deprive us of, and
the more likely, by how much the
greater Worth our Possessions are of! Is
it not to place our Affections on a Bubble
in the Water, or a Picture in the
Clouds! What Mad-man would build a
fine House, or frame a beautiful Garden
on Land in which he held so uncertain 

an Interest. But again, was all this less
undeniable, did Fortune, like the Lady
of a Manor, lease to us for our Lives; 
of how little Consideration must even
this Term appear? For admitting that
these Pleasures were not liable to be torn
from us; how certainly must we be torn
from them! Perhaps To-morrow,—Nay
or even sooner: For as the excellent Poet
says, 
“Where is To-morrow?—In the other World.
“To thousands this is true, and the Reverse
“Is sure to none.
“But if I have no further Hope in this
World, can I have none beyond it. Surely
those laborious Writers, who have taken
such infinite Pains to destroy or weaken
all the Proofs of Futurity, have not so
far succeeded as to exclude us from
Hope. That active Principle in Man,
which with such Boldness pushes on
through every Labour and Difficulty, to
attain the most distant and most improbable 

Event in this World, will not
surely deny us a little flattering Prospect; 
which, if it could be chimerical,
must be allowed the loveliest which can
entertain the Eye of Man; and which, if
we understand the Road rightly, hath so
little Labour and Fatigue, so few Thorns
and Briers in its Way. If the Proofs
of a supreme Being be as strong
as I imagine them, surely enough may
be deduced from that Ground only to
comfort and support the most miserable
Man in his Afflictions. And this I think
my Reason tells me, that if the Professors
and Propagators of Infidelity are in
the right, the Losses which Death brings
to the Virtuous are not worth their lamenting; 
but if they are, as certainly
they seem, in the wrong, the Blessings
it procures them are not sufficiently
to be coveted and rejoiced at. 
“On my own Account then, I have no
cause for Sorrow, but on my Children's. 
Why, the same Being to whose Goodness
and Power I entrust my own Happiness,
is likewise as able and as willing 

to procure theirs. Nor matters it what
State of Life they are allotted, whether
to procure Bread with their own Labour,
or to eat it at the Sweat of others. 
Perhaps, if we consider the Case with
proper Attention, or resolve it with due
Sincerity; the former is the sweetest. 
The Hind may be more happy than the
Lord; for his Desires are fewer, and those
such as are attended with more Hope
and less Fear. I will do my utmost to
lay the Foundations of their Happiness,
I will carefully avoid educating them in
a Station superior to their Fortune, and
for the Event trust to that Being in
whom whoever rightly confides, must
be superior to all worldly Sorrows.” 
In this low Manner, did this poor
Wretch proceed to argue, till he had worked
himself up into an Enthusiasm, which
by Degrees soon became invulnerable to
every human Attack; so that when Mr.
Snap acquainted him with the Return of
the Writ, and that he must carry him to
Newgate, he received the Message as Socrates 

did the News of the Ship's Arrival,
and that he was to prepare for Death. 