


The Character of our Hero, and the
Conclusion of this History. 
We will now endeavour to draw the
Character of this great Man, and
by bringing together those several Features as
it were of his Mind, which lie scattered up
and down in this History, to present our
Readers with a perfect Picture of Greatness. 
Jonathan Wild had every Qualification
necessary to form a great Man: As his
most powerful and predominant Passion
was Ambition, so Nature had with consummate
Propriety, adapted all his Faculties to
the attaining those glorious Ends, to which
this Passion directed him. He was extremely
ingenious in inventing Designs; artful in 

contriving the Means to accomplish his
Purposes, and resolute in executing them: 
For, as the most exquisite Cunning, and most
undaunted Boldness qualified him for any
Undertaking, so was he not restrained by
any of those Weaknesses which disappoint
the Views of mean and vulgar Souls, and
which are comprehended in one general
Term of Honesty, which is a Corruption of
Honosty, a Word derived from what the
Greeks call an Ass. He was entirely free
from those low Vices of Modesty and Goodnature,
which, as he said, implied a total
Negative of human Greatness, and were
the only Qualities which absolutely rendered
a Man incapable of making a considerable
Figure in the World. His Lust was
inferior only to his Ambition; but, as for
what simple People call Love, he knew not
what it was. His Avarice was immense; 
but it was of the rapacious not of the tenacious
Kind; his Rapaciousness was indeed
so violent, that nothing ever contented
him but the whole; for, however considerable
the Share was, which his Coadjutors
allowed him of a Booty, he was restless in
inventing Means to make himself Master 

of the meanest Pittance reserved by them. 
He said, Laws were made for the Use of
Prigs only, and to secure their Property; 
they were never therefore more perverted,
than when their Edge was turned against
these; but that this generally happened
through their Want of sufficient Dexterity. 
The Character which he most valued himself
upon, and which he principally honoured
in others, was that of Hypocrisy. 
His Opinion was, that no one could carry
Priggism very far without it; for which
Reason, he said, there was little Greatness
to be expected in a Man who acknowledged
his Vices; but always much to be
hoped from him, who professed great Virtues; 
wherefore, though he would always
shun the Person whom he discovered
guilty of a good Action, yet he was never
deterred by a good Character, which was
more commonly the Effect of Profession
than of Action: For which Reason, he
himself was always very liberal of honest
Professions, and had as much Virtue and
Goodness in his Mouth as a Saint; never
in the least scrupling to swear by his Honour,
even to those who knew him the 

best; nay, tho, he held Good-nature and
Modesty in the highest Contempt, he constantly
practised the Affectation of both, and
recommended it to others, whose welfare,
on his own Account, he wished well to. He
laid down several Maxims, as the certain
Methods of attaining Greatness, to which,
in his own Pursuit of it, he constantly adhered.
As 
1. Never to do more Mischief to another,
than was necessary to the effecting
his Purpose; for that Mischief was
too precious a thing to be thrown
away. 
2. To know no Distinction of Men from
Affection; but to sacrifice all with equal
Readiness to his Interest. 
3. Never to communicate more of an
Affair than was necessary, to the Person
who was to execute it. 
4. Not to trust him, who had deceived
him, nor who knew he had himself
been deceived by him. 

5. To forgive no Enemy; but to be cautious
and often dilatory in Revenge. 
6. To shun Poverty and Distress, and to
ally himself, as close as possible, to
Power and Riches. 
7. To maintain a constant Gravity in his
Countenance and Behaviour, and to
affect Wisdom on all Occasions. 
8. To foment eternal Jealousies in his
Gang, one of another. 
9. Never to reward any one equal to
his Merit; but always to insinuate,
that the Reward was above it. 
10. That all Men were Knaves or
Fools, and much the greater Number
a Composition of both. 
11. That a good Name, like Money,
must be parted with, or at least greatly
risqued, in order to bring the Owner
any Advantage. 

12. That Virtues, like precious Stones,
were easily counterfeited; that Counterfeits
in both Cases adorned the
Wearer equally, and that very few
had Knowledge or Discernment sufficient
to distinguish the counterfeit
Jewel from the real. 
13. That many Men were undone by
not going deep enough in Roguery, as
in Gaming any Man may be a Loser
who doth not play the whole Game. 
14. That Men proclaim their own Virtues,
as Shopkeepers expose their Goods,
in order to profit by them. 
15. That the Heart was the proper Seat
of Hatred, and the Countenance of
Affection and Friendship. 
He had many more of the same Kind,
all equally good with these, and which were
after his Decease found in his Study, as the
twelve excellent and celebrated Rules were
in that of King Charles the first; for he
never promulgated them in his Life time, 

not having them constantly in his Mouth, as
some grave Persons have the Rules of Virtue
and Morality, without paying the least
Regard to them in their Actions; whereas
our Hero, by a constant and steady Adherence
to his Rules in conforming every thing he
did to them, acquired at last a settled Habit
of walking by them, till at last he was
in no Danger of inadvertently going out of
the Way; and by these Means he arrived
at that Degree of Greatness, which few
have equalled; none, we may say, have
exceeded: For, tho' it must be allowed that
there have been some few Heroes, who have
done greater Mischiefs to Mankind, such as
those who have betrayed the Liberties of
their Country to others, or have undermined
and over-powered it themselves, or Conquerors
who have impoverished, pillaged,
sacked, burnt, and destroyed the Countries
and Cities of their fellow Creatures, from no
other Provocation than that of Glory; i. e.
as the Tragic Poet calls it, 

—A Privilege to kill,
A strong Temptation to do bravely ill.

yet, if we consider it in the Light wherein
Actions are placed in this Line, 

Lætius est, quoties magno tibi constat honestum.
when we see him, without the least Assistance
or Pretence, setting himself at the Head of a
Gang, which he had not any Shadow of
Right to govern; if we view him maintaining
absolute Power, and exercising Tyranny
over a lawless Crew, contrary to all
Law, but that of his own Will. If we consider
him setting up an open Trade publicly,
in Defiance, not only of the Laws of his
Country, but of the Common Sense of his
Countrymen; if we see him first contriving
the Robbery of others, and again the
defrauding the very Robbers of that Booty,
which they had ventured their Necks to acquire,
and which without any Hazard they
might have retained: Here sure he must
appear admirable, and we may challenge
not only the Truth of History, but almost
the Latitude of Fiction to equal it. 
Nor had he any of those Flaws in his
Character, which, though they have been 

commended by weak Writers, have, (as I
hinted in the Beginning of this History) by the
judicious Reader, been censured and despised. 
Such is the Clemency of Alexander
and Cæsar, which Nature hath as grossly
erred in giving them, as a Painter would,
who should dress a Peasant in Robes of
State, or give the Nose, or any other Feature
of a Venus, to a Satyr. What had
the Destroyers of Mankind, that glorious
Pair, one of which came into the World
to usurp the Dominion, and abolish the
Constitution of his own Country; the other
to conquer, enslave, and rule over the whole
World, at least as much as was well known
to him, and the Shortness of his Life
would give him Leave to visit; what had,
I say, such as these to do with Clemency? 
Who cannot see the Absurdity and Contradiction
of mixing such an Ingredient with
those noble and great Qualities I have before
mentioned. Now in Wild, every thing
was truly GREAT, almost without Alloy,
as his Imperfections (for surely some
small ones he had) were only such as served
to denominate him a human Creature, 

of which kind none ever arrived at consummate
Excellence: But surely his whole
Behaviour to his Friend Heartfree is a
convincing Proof, that the true Iron or
Steel Greatness of his Heart was not
debased by any softer Mettle. Indeed while
Greatness consists in Power, Pride, Insolence,
and doing Mischief to Mankind; 
—to speak out,—while a GREAT
Man and a GREAT Rogue are synonymous
Terms, so long shall Wild stand unrivalled
on the Pinacle of Greatness. Nor must
we omit here, as the finishing of his Character,
what indeed ought to be remembered
on his Tomb or his Statue, the Conformity
above mentioned of his Death to
his Life; and that Jonathan Wild the
Great was, what so few GREAT Men are,
though all in Propriety ought to be— 
hanged by the Neck 'till he was dead. 
Having thus brought our Hero to his
Conclusion, it may be satisfactory to some
Readers (for many, I doubt not, carry
their Concern no farther than his Fate) to
know what became of Heartfree. We shall
acquaint them, therefore, that his Sufferings 

were now at an End; that the good Magistrate
easily prevailed for his Pardon, nor
was contented 'till he had made him all the
Reparation he could for his Suffering, tho'
the Share he had in bringing the Calamity
upon him, was not only innocent, but, from
its Motive, laudable. He procured the
Restoration of the Jewels from the Man of
War, at her Return to England, and, above
all, omitted no Labour to restore Heartfree
to his Reputation, and to persuade his
Neighbours, Acquaintance, and Customers
of his Innocence. When the Commission
of Bankruptcy was satisfied, Heartfree had
a considerable Sum remaining; for the Diamond
presented to his Wife was of prodigious
Value, and infinitely recompensed the
Loss of those Jewels for which the Count
had paid, when the GREAT Wild procured
him to be robbed of the Money. He
now set up again in his Trade; Compassion
for his unmerited Misfortunes brought
him many Customers among those who
had any Regard to Humanity; and he
hath, by Industry joined with Parsimony,
amassed an immense Fortune. His Wife
and he are now grown old in the purest 

Love and Friendship; but never had another
Child. Friendly married his eldest
Daughter at the Age of nineteen, and became
his Partner in Trade. As to the
youngest, she never would listen to the Addresses
of any Lover, not even of a young
Nobleman, who offered to take her with
two thousand Pounds, which her Father
would have willingly produced, and
indeed did his utmost to persuade her to
the Match: But she refused absolutely, nor
would give any other Reason, than that she
had dedicated her Days to his Service, and
was resolved, no other Duty should interfere
with that she owed the best of Fathers,
nor prevent her from being the Nurse of
his old Age. 
Thus Heartfree, his Wife, his two
Daughters, his Son-in-Law, and his Grandchildren,
of which he hath several, live
all together in one House; and that with
such Amity and Affection towards each other,
that they are in the Neighbourhood
called the Family of Love. 

As to all the other Persons mentioned in
this History, in the Light of Greatness,
they had all the Fate adapted to it, being
every one hanged by the Neck, save two,
viz. Miss Theodosia Snap, who was transported
to America, where she was pretty
well married, reformed, and made a good
Wife; and the Count, who recovered of
the Wound he had received from the Hermit,
and made his Escape into France, where
he committed a Robbery, was taken, and
broke on the Wheel. 
Indeed whoever considers the common
Fate of great Men must allow, they
well deserve, and hardly earn that Applause
which is given them by the World; for,
when we reflect on the Labours and Pains,
the Cares, Disquietudes, and Dangers which
attend their Road to Greatness, we may
say with the Divine, that a Man may go
to Heaven with half the Pains which it
costs him to purchase Hell; nor is the
World so unanimous as they ought to be
in conferring this dear-bought Reward. 
For, while the Majority of Mankind, while 

Courts and Cities resound the Praises of
the said great Men, there are still some
in Cells and Cottages, who view their
Greatness with a malignant Eye; and
dare affirm, that these great Men, who
are always the most pernicious, are generally
the most wretched and truly contemptible
of all the Works of the Creation. 