


The Author is surprized at meeting
Julian the Apostate in Elysium:
but is satisfied by him, by what
means he procured his Entrance
there. Julian relates his Adventures
in the Character of a Slave. 
As he was departing, I heard him salute
a Spirit by the Name of Mr. Julian
the Apostate. This exceedingly amazed me:
for I had concluded, that no Man ever had a
better Title to the Bottomless Pit than he. 
But I soon found, that this same Julian the
Apostate was also the very individual Arch-Bishop
Latimer. He told me, that several
Lyes had been raised on him in his former Capacity,
nor was he so bad a Man as he had
been represented. However, he had been denied
Admittance, and forced to undergo several
subsequent Pilgrimages on Earth, and to act
in the different Characters of a Slave, a Jew,
a General, an Heir, a Carpenter, a Beau, a
Monk, a Fidler, a wise Man, a King, a 

Fool, a Beggar, a Prince, a Statesman, a
Soldier, a Taylor, an Alderman, a Poet, a
Knight, a Dancing-Master, and three times
a Bishop before his Martyrdom, together
with his other Behaviour in this last Character,
satisfied the Judge, and procured him a
Passage to the blessed Regions. 
I Told him, such various Characters must
have produced Incidents extremely entertaining; 
and if he remembered all, as I supposed
he did, and had Leisure, I should be
obliged to him for the Recital. He answered,
he perfectly recollected every Circumstance; 
and as to Leisure, the only
Business of that happy Place was to contribute
to the Happiness of each other. He
therefore thanked me for increasing his, in proposing
to him a Method of pleasing mine. I
then took my little Darling in one Hand, and
my Favourite Fellow-Traveller in the other,
and going with him to a sunny Bank of Flowers,
we all sat down, and he began as follows: 
‘I Suppose, you are sufficiently acquainted
with my Story, during the Time I 

acted the Part of the Emperor Julian, tho'
I assure you, all which hath been related of
me is not true, particularly with regard to
the many Prodigies forerunning my Death. 
However, they are now very little worth
disputing; and if they can serve any Purpose
of the Historian, they are extremely at his
service. 
‘My next Entrance into the World, was
at Laodicea in Syria, in a Roman Family
of no great Note; and being of a roving
Disposition, I came at the Age of Seventeen
to Constantinople, where after about a
Year's stay, I set out for Thrace at the
Time when the Emperor Valens admitted
the Goths into that Country. I was there
so captivated with the Beauty of a Gothic
Lady, the Wife of one Rodoric a Captain,
whose Name, out of the most delicate
Tenderness for her lovely Sex, I shall even
at this Distance conceal; since her Behaviour
to me was more consistent with Good-Nature,
than with that Virtue which Women
are obliged to preserve against every Assailant. 
In order to procure an Intimacy with
this Woman, I sold my self a Slave to her 

Husband, who being of a Nation not over-inclined
to Jealousy, presented me to his
Wife, for those very Reasons, which would
have induced one of a jealous Complexion
to have with-held me from her, namely,
for that I was young and handsome. 
‘Matters succeeded so far according to
my Wish, and the Sequel answered those
Hopes which this Beginning had raised. I
soon perceived my Service was very acceptable
to her, I often met her Eyes, nor did
she withdraw them without a Confusion
which is scarce consistent with entire Purity
of Heart. Indeed, she gave me every day
fresh Encouragement, but the unhappy Distance
which Circumstances had placed between
us, deterred me long from making
any direct Attack; and she was too strict an
Observer of Decorum, to violate the severe
Rules of Modesty by advancing first: but
Passion, at last, got the better of my Respect,
and I resolved to make one bold Attempt,
whatever was the Consequence. Accordingly,
laying hold of the first kind Opportunity,
when she was alone, and my
Master abroad, I stoutly assailed the Citadel, 

and carried it by Storm. Well may I say
by Storm: for the Resistance I met was
extremely resolute, and indeed, as much as
the most perfect Decency would require. 
She swore often she would cry out for Help:
but I answered, it was in vain, seeing there
was no Person near to assist her; and probably
she believed me, for she did not once
actually cry out; which if she had, I might
very likely have been prevented. 
‘When she found her Virtue thus subdued
against her Will, she patiently submitted
to her Fate, and quietly suffered me
a long time to enjoy the most delicious
Fruits of my Victory: but envious Fortune
resolved to make me pay a dear Price for my
Pleasure. One day, in the midst of our
Happiness, we were suddenly surprized by
the unexpected Return of her Husband,
who coming directly into his Wife's Apartment,
just allowed me time to creep under
the Bed. The Disorder in which he
found his Wife, might have surprized a jealous
Temper; but his was so far otherwise,
that possibly no Mischief might have happened,
had he not by a cross Accident discovered 

my Legs, which were not well hid. 
He immediately drew me out by them, and
then turning to his Wife with a stern Countenance,
began to handle a Weapon he wore
by his Side, with which I am persuaded he
would have instantly dispatched her, had I
not very gallantly and with many Imprecations
asserted her Innocence and my own
Guilt; which, however, I protested had
hitherto gone no farther than Design. She
so well seconded my Plea, (for she was a
Woman of wonderful Art) that he was at
length imposed upon; and now all his Rage
was directed against me, threatning all manner
of Tortures, which the poor Lady was
in too great a Fright and Confusion to dissuade
him from executing; and perhaps, if
her Concern for me had made her attempt
it, it would have raised a Jealousy in him
not afterwards to be removed. 
‘After some Hesitation, Rodoric cried
out, he had luckily hit on the most proper
Punishment for me in the World, by a Method
which would at once do severe Justice
on me for my criminal Intention, and at
the same time, prevent me from any Danger 

of executing my wicked Purpose hereafter. 
This cruel Resolution was immediately
executed, and I was no longer worthy
the Name of a Man. 
‘Having thus disqualified me from doing
him any future Injury, he still retained me in
his Family: but the Lady, very probably
repenting of what she had done, and looking
on me as the Author of her Guilt,
would never, for the future, give me either
a kind Word or Look: and shortly after, a
great Exchange being made between the
Romans and the Goths of Dogs for Men,
my Lady exchanged me with a Roman Widow
for a small Lap-Dog, giving a considerable
Sum of Money to boot. 
‘In this Widow's Service I remained seven
Years, during all which time I was very
barbarously treated. I was worked without
the least Mercy, and often severely beat by
a swinging Maid-Servant, who never called
me by any other Names than those of the
Thing and the Animal. Though I used my
utmost Industry to please, it never was in
my power. Neither the Lady nor her Woman
would eat any thing I touched, saying, 

they did not believe me wholesome. It is
unnecessary to repeat Particulars; in a word,
you can imagine no kind of ill Usage which
I did not suffer in this Family. 
‘At last, a Heathen Priest, an Acquaintance
of my Lady's, obtained me of her for
a Present. The Scene was now totally
changed, and I had as much reason to be
satisfied with my present Situation, as I had
to lament my former. I was so absolutely
my Master's Favourite, that the rest of the
Slaves paid me almost as much Regard as
they shewed to him, well knowing, that
it was entirely in my power to command
and treat them as I pleased. I was intrusted
with all my Master's Secrets, and used to
assist him in privately conveying away by
Night the Sacrifices from the Altars, which
the People believed the Deities themselves
devoured. Upon these we feasted very elegantly,
nor could Invention suggest a Rarity
which we did not pamper ourselves with. 
Perhaps you may admire at the close Union
between this Priest and his Slave: but we
lived in an Intimacy which the Christians
thought criminal: but my Master, who knew 

the Will of the Gods, with whom he told me
he often conversed, assured me it was perfectly
innocent. 
‘This happy Life continued about four
Years, when my Master's Death, occasioned
by a Surfeit got by over-feeding on several
exquisite Dainties, put an end to it. 
‘I Now fell into the hands of one of a
very different Disposition, and this was no
other than the celebrated St. Chrysostome,
who dieted me with Sermons instead of
Sacrifices, and filled my Ears with good
Things, but not my Belly. Instead of
high Food to fatten and pamper my Flesh, I
had Receipts to mortify and reduce it. 
With these I edified so well, that within a
few Months I became a Skeleton. However,
as he had converted me to his Faith, I
was well enough satisfied with this new
Manner of living, by which he taught me I
might insure myself an eternal Reward in
a future State. The Saint was a good-natured
Man, and never gave me an ill
Word but once, which was occasioned by
my neglecting to place Aristophanes, which
was his constant Bed-fellow, on his Pillow. 

He was, indeed, extremely fond of that
Greek Poet, and frequently made me read
his Comedies to him: when I came to any
of the loose Passages, he would smile, and
say, It was pity his Matter was not as pure
as his Style; of which latter, he was so immoderately
fond, that notwithstanding the
Detestation he expressed for Obscenity, he
hath made me repeat those Passages ten
times over. The Character of this good
Man hath been very unjustly attacked by his
Heathen Cotemporaries, particularly with
regard to Women; but his severe Invectives
against that Sex, are his sufficient Justification. 
‘From the Service of this Saint, from
whom I received Manumission, I entered into
the Family of Timasius, a Leader of great
Eminence in the Imperial Army, into whose
Favour I so far insinuated myself, that he
preferred me to a good Command, and
soon made me Partaker of both his Company
and his Secrets. I soon grew intoxicated
with this Preferment, and the more
he loaded me with Benefits, the more he
raised my Opinion of my own Merit; 
which still outstripping the Rewards he conferred 

on me, inspired me rather with Dissatisfaction
than Gratitude. And thus, by
preferring me beyond my Merit or first
Expectation, he made me an envious aspiring
Enemy, whom perhaps, a more moderate
Bounty, would have preserved a dutiful
Servant. 
‘I Fell now acquainted with one Lucilius,
a Creature of the Prime-Minister Eutropius,
who had by his Favour been raised
to the Post of a Tribune; a Man of low
Morals, and eminent only in that meanest
of all Qualities, Cunning. This Gentleman
imagining me a fit Tool for the Minister's
Purpose, having often sounded my
Principles of Honour and Honesty; both
which he declared to me were Words without
Meaning: and finding my ready Concurrence
in his Sentiments, recommended
me to Eutropius, as very proper to execute
some wicked Purposes he had contrived against
my Friend Timasius. The Minister
embraced this Recommendation, and I was
accordingly acquainted by Lucilius, (after
some previous Accounts of the great Esteem
Eutropius entertained of me, from the Testimony 

he had born of my Parts) that he
would introduce me to him; adding, that
he was a great Encourager of Merit, and
that I might depend upon his Favour. 
‘I Was with little difficulty prevailed on
to accept this Invitation. A late Hour therefore
the next Evening being appointed, I
attended my Friend Lucilius to the Minister's
House. He received me with the utmost
Civility and Chearfulness, and affected
so much Regard to me, that I, who knew
nothing of these high Scenes of Life, concluded
I had in him a most disinterested
Friend, owing to the favourable Report
which Lucilius had made of me. I was
however soon cured of this Opinion: for
immediately after Supper, our Discourse
turned on the Injustice which the Generality
of the World were guilty of in their Conduct
to Great Men, expecting that they
should reward their private Merit, without
ever endeavouring to apply it to their Use. 
What avail (said Eutropius) the Learning,
Wit, Courage, or any Virtue which a Man
may be possest of to me, unless I receive some
Benefit from them? Hath he not more Merit 

to me, who doth my Business, and obeys
my Commands, without any of these Qualities? 
I gave such entire Satisfaction in my
Answers on this Head, that both the Minister
and his Creature grew bolder, and
after some Preface, began to accuse Timasius. 
At last, finding I did not attempt to
defend him, Lucilius swore a great Oath,
that he was not fit to live, and that he would
destroy him. Eutropius answered, that it
would be too dangerous a Task: Indeed,
says he, his Crimes are of so black a Dye,
and so well known to the Emperor, that his
Death must be a very acceptable Service,
and could not fail meeting a proper Reward; 
but I question whether you are capable
of executing it. If he is not, cried I,
I am; and surely, no Man can have greater
Motives to destroy him than my self: for,
besides his Disloyalty to my Prince, for
whom I have so perfect a Duty, I have private
Disobligations to him. I have had Fellows
put over my head, to the great Scandal
of the Service in general, and to my own
Prejudice and Disappointment in particular. 
—I will not repeat you my whole
Speech: but to be as concise as possible, 

when we parted that Evening, the Minister
squeezed me heartily by the Hand, and
with great Commendation of my Honesty,
and Assurances of his Favour, he appointed
me, the next Evening, to come to him
alone; when finding me, after a little more
Scrutiny, ready for his Purpose, he proposed
to me, to accuse Timasius of High-Treason:
promising me the highest Rewards, if
I would undertake it. The Consequence
to him, I suppose you know, was Ruin:
but what was it to me? Why truly, when
I waited on Eutropius, for the fulfilling
his Promises, he received me with great
Distance and Coldness; and on my dropping
some Hints of my Expectations from
him, he affected not to understand me; 
saying, he thought Impunity was the utmost
I could hope for, on discovering my
Accomplice, whose Offence was only greater
than mine, as he was in a higher Station; 
and telling me, he had great difficulty to obtain
a Pardon for me from the Emperor,
which, he said he had struggled very hardly
for, as he had worked the Discovery out of
me, he turned away, and addressed himself
to another Person. 

‘I Was so incensed at this Treatment, that
I resolved Revenge, and should certainly have
pursued it, had he not cautiously prevented
me, by taking effectual Means to dispatch
me soon after out of the World. 
‘You will, I believe, now think, I had a
second good Chance for the Bottomless Pit,
and indeed Minos seemed inclined to tumble
me in, till he was informed of the Revenge
taken on me by Rodoric, and my seven
Years subsequent Servitude to the Widow; 
which he said he thought sufficient to make
Atonement for all the Crimes a single Life
could admit of, and so sent me back to try
my Fortune a third time.’ 