


A short Hint concerning popular Ingratitude. 
Mr. Wild's Arrival in
the Castle, with other Occurrences
to be found in no other History. 
If we had any Leisure, we would here
digress a little on that Ingratitude, which
so many Writers have observed in all free
Governments towards their great Men; 
who, while they have been consulting the
Good of the Public, by raising their own
Greatness, in which the whole Body
(as the Kingdom of France thinks itself in
the Glory of their Grand Monarch) was so
deeply concerned, have been sometimes sacrificed 

by those very People for whose
Glory the said great Men were so industriously
at work: And this from a foolish
Zeal for a certain ridiculous imaginary
Thing called Liberty, to which great
Men are observed to have a great Animosity. 
This Law had been promulgated a very
little Time, when Mr. Wild, having received
from some dutiful Members of the Gang,
a valuable Piece of Goods, did, for a Consideration
somewhat short of its original
Price, re-convey it to the right Owner; for
which Fact being ungratefully informed
against by the said Owner, he was surprized
in his own House, and being over-power'd
by Numbers, was hurried before a Magistrate,
and by him committed to that
Castle, which, suitable as it is to Greatness,
we do not chuse to name too often
in our History, and where many great
Men, at this Time, happened to be assembled. 
The Governor, or as the Law more honourably
calls him, Keeper of this Castle,
having been Mr. Wild's old Friend and Acquaintance, 

made the latter greatly satisfied
with the Place of his Confinement, as he promised
himself not only a kind Reception and
handsome Accommodation there, but even
to obtain his Liberty from him, if he thought
it necessary to desire it: But alas! he was
deceived, his old Friend knew him no longer,
and refusing to see him, ordered the
Lieutenant Governor to insist on as high
Garnish for Fetters, and as exorbitant a
Price for Lodging, as if he had had a fine
Gentleman in Custody for Murther, or as
if he had received an Intimation from a certain
Place to use all the Severity imaginable
to his Prisoner. 
To confess a melancholy Truth, it is a
Circumstance much to be lamented; that
there is no absolute Dependence on the
Friendship of great Men. An Observation
which hath been frequently made
by those who have lived in Courts or in
Newgate, or in any other Place set apart
for the Habitation of the said great
Men. 
The second Day of his Confinement he
was greatly surprized at receiving a Visit 

from his Wife; and much more so, when,
instead of a Countenance ready to insult
him, the only Motive to which he could
ascribe her Presence, he saw the Tears
trickling down her lovely Cheeks. He
embraced her with the utmost Marks of
Affection, and declared he could hardly
regret his Confinement, since it had produced
such an Instance of the Happiness he
enjoyed in her, whose Fidelity to him on
this Occasion, would, he believed, make
him the Envy of most Husbands, even
in Newgate. He then begged her to dry
her Eyes, and be comforted; for that Matters
might go better with him than she expected. 
“No, no, (says she) I am certain
you will be found guilty Death. I
knew what it would always come to. I
told you it was impossible to carry on
such a Trade long; but you would not
be advised, and now you see the Consequence,
now you repent when it is too
late. All the Comfort I shall have when
you are *  nubbed, is that I gave you good
Advice. If you had always gone out by
yourself, as I would have had you, you 

might have robbed on to the End of the
Chapter; but you was wiser than all the
World, or rather lazier, and see what
your Laziness is come to. —To the
*  Cheat, for thither you will go now,
that's infallible. And a just Judgment
on you for following your headstrong
Will; I am the only Person to be pitied,
poor I, who shall be scandalized for your
Fault. There goes she whose Husband
was hanged: Methinks I hear them crying
so already”. At which Words she
burst into Tears. He could not then forbear
chiding her for this unnecessary Concern
on his Account, and begged her not
to trouble him any more. She answered
with some Spirit, “On your Account, and
be d&wblank;d to you! No, if the old Cull
of a Justice had not sent me here, I
believe it would have been long enough
before I should have come hither to see
after you: D&wblank;n me, I am committed
for the †  Filing-Lay, Man, and we
shall be both nubbed together. I faith,
my dear, it almost makes me Amends
for being nubbed myself, to have the 

Pleasure of seeing thee nubbed too. Indeed,
my Dear, (answered Wild) it is
what I have always wished for thee; 
but I do not desire to bear thee Company,
and I have still Hopes to have the
Pleasure of seeing you go without me; 
at least I will have the Pleasure to be rid
of you now.” And so saying, he seized
her by the Waste, and with strong Arm
flung her out of the Room; but not before
she had with her Nails left a bloody Memorial
on his Cheek: And thus this fond
Couple parted. 
Wild had scarce recovered himself from
the Uneasiness into which this unwelcome
Visit, proceeding from the disagreeable
Fondness of his Wife, had thrown him,
than the faithful Achates appeared. The
Presence of this Youth was indeed a Cordial
to his Spirits. He received him with
open Arms, and expressed the utmost Satisfaction
in the Fidelity of his Friendship,
which so far exceeded the Fashion of the
Times, and said many Things, which we
have forgot, on the Occasion; but we remember
they all tended to the Praise of 

Fireblood, whose Modesty, at length, put a
Stop to the Torrent of Compliments, by
asserting he had done no more than his
Duty, and that he should have detested
himself, could he have forsaken his Friend
in his Adversity, and after many Protestations,
that he came the Moment he heard
of his Misfortune, he asked him if he could
be of any Service. Wild answered, since
he had so kindly proposed that Question,
he must say he should be obliged to him, if
he could lend him a few Guineas; for that
he was very seedy. Fireblood replied, that
he was greatly unhappy in not having it then
in his Power, adding many hearty Oaths,
that he had not a Farthing of Money in his
Pocket, which was, indeed, strictly true; 
for he had only a Bank-Note which he had
that Evening purloined from a Gentleman
in the Playhouse-Passage. He then asked
for his Wife, to whom, to speak truly, the
Visit was intended, her Confinement being
the Misfortune of which he had just heard; 
for, as for that of Mr. Wild himself, he had
known it from the first, without ever intending
to trouble him with his Company. 
Being informed therefore of the Visit which 

had lately happened, he reproved Wild for
his cruel Treatment of that good Creature; 
then taking as sudden Leave as he civilly
could of the Gentleman, he hastned to
comfort his Lady, who received him with
great Kindness. 