


Containing Scenes of matrimonial Felicity in
different Degrees of Life; and various other
Transactions during the first two Years after
the Marriage between Captain Blifil,
and Miss Bridget Allworthy. 



Shewing what Kind of a History this is; 
what it is like, and what it is not like. 
Tho' we have properly enough entitled
this our Work, a History,
and not a Life; nor an Apology for
a Life, as is more in Fashion; yet we intend
in it rather to pursue the Method of 

those Writers who profess to disclose the Revolutions
of Countries, than to imitate the
painful and voluminous Historian, who to
preserve the Regularity of his Series thinks
himself obliged to fill up as much Paper
with the Detail of Months and Years in
which nothing remarkable happened, as he
employs upon those notable Æras when the
greatest Scenes have been transacted on the
human Stage. 
Such Histories as these do, in reality,
very much resemble a News-Paper, which
consists of just the same Number of Words,
whether there be any News in it or not. 
They may likewise be compared to a Stage-Coach,
which performs constantly the same
Course, empty as well as full. The Writer,
indeed, seems to think himself obliged to
keep even Pace with Time, whose Amanuensis
he is; and, like his Master, travels as
slowly through Centuries of monkish Dulness,
when the World seems to have been
asleep, as through that bright and busy Age
so nobly distinguished by the excellent Latin
Poet. 

“Ad confligendum venientibus undique pænis;
Omnia cum belli trepido concussa tumultu

Horrida contremuere sub altis ætheris auris:
In dubioque fuit sub utrorum regna cadendum
Omnibus humanis esset, terraque marique.”
Of which, we wish we could give our
Reader a more adequate Translation than
that by Mr. Creech. 
“When dreadful Carthage frighted Rome with Arms
And all the World was shook with fierce Alarms;
Whilst undecided yet, which Part should fall,
Which Nation rise the glorious Lord of all.”
Now it is our Purpose in the ensuing
Pages, to pursue a contrary Method. When
any extraordinary Scene presents itself (as
we trust will often be the Case) we shall
spare no Pains nor Paper to open it at large
to our Reader; but if whole Years should
 pass without producing any thing worthy
his Notice, we shall not be afraid of a Chasm
in our History; but shall hasten on to Matters
of Consequence, and leave such Periods
of Time totally unobserved. 

These are indeed to be considered as
Blanks in the grand Lottery of Time. We
therefore who are the Registers of that Lottery,
shall imitate those sagacious Persons
who deal in that which is drawn at Guild-Hall,
and who never trouble the Public
with the many Blanks they dispose of; but
when a great Prize happens to be drawn,
the News-Papers are presently filled with it,
and the World is sure to be informed at
whose Office it was sold: Indeed, commonly
two or three different Offices lay
claim to the Honour of having disposed of
it; by which I suppose the Adventurers are
given to understand that certain Brokers are
in the Secrets of Fortune, and indeed of
her Cabinet-Council. 
My Reader then is not to be surprised, if
in the Course of this Work, he shall find
some Chapters very short, and others altogether
as long; some that contain only the
Time of a single Day, and others that comprise
Years; in a word, if my History
sometimes seems to stand still, and sometimes
to fly. For all which I shall not look on
myself as accountable to any Court of Critical
Jurisdiction whatever: For as I am, in
reality, the Founder of a new Province of 

Writing, so I am at liberty to make what
Laws I please therein. And these Laws,
my Readers, whom I consider as my Subjects,
are bound to believe in and to obey; 
with which that they may readily and chearfully
comply, I do hereby assure them that
I shall principally regard their Ease and Advantage
in all such Institutions: For I do
not, like a jure divino Tyrant, imagine that
they are my Slaves or my Commodity. I
am, indeed, set over them for their own
Good only, and was created for their Use,
and not they for mine. Nor do I doubt,
while I make their Interest the great Rule
of my Writings, they will unanimously concur
in supporting my Dignity, and in rendering
me all the Honour I shall deserve or
desire. 



Religious Cautions against shewing too much
Favour to Bastards; and a great Discovery
made by Mrs. Deborah Wilkins. 
Eight Months after the Celebration of
the Nuptials between Captain Blifil and
Miss Bridget Allworthy, a young Lady of
great Beauty, Merit, and Fortune, was
Miss Bridget, by reason of a Fright, delivered 

of a fine Boy. The Child, was indeed, to all
Appearance, perfect; but the Midwife discovered,
it was born a Month before its full
Time. 
Tho' the Birth of an Heir of his beloved
Sister was a Circumstance of great Joy to
Mr. Allworthy, yet it did not alienate his
Affections from the little Foundling, to
whom he had been Godfather, had given his
own Name of Thomas, and whom he had
hitherto seldom failed of visiting at least once
a Day, in his Nursery. 
He told his Sister, if she pleased, the
new-born Infant should be bred up together
with little Tommy, to which she consented,
tho' with some little Reluctance: For she
had truly a great Complacence for her Brother; 
and hence she had always behaved towards
the Foundling with rather more Kindness
than Ladies of rigid Virtue can sometimes
bring themselves to shew to these
Children, who, however innocent, may be
truly called the living Monuments of Incontinence. 
The Captain could not so easily bring
himself to bear what he condemned as a
Fault in Mr. Allworthy. He gave him frequent 

Hints, that to adopt the Fruits of Sin
was to give countenance to it. He quoted
several Texts (for he was well read in
Scripture) such as, He visits the Sins
of the Fathers upon the Children; and,
the Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the
Children's Teeth are set on edge, &c. 
Whence he argued the Legality of punishing
the Crime of the Parent on the Bastard. 
He said, ‘Tho' the Law did not positively
allow the destroying such base-born Children,
yet it held them to be the Children
of no body; that the Church considered
them as the Children of no body; and
that at the best, they ought to be brought
up to the lowest and vilest Offices of the
Commonwealth.’ 
Mr. Allworthy answered to all this and
much more which the Captain had urged on
this Subject, ‘That however guilty the Parents
might be, the Children were certainly
innocent. That as to the Texts
he had quoted, the former of them was a
particular Denunciation against the Jews
for the Sin of Idolatry, of relinquishing
and hating their heavenly King; and the
latter was parabolically spoken, and rather
intended to denote the certain and
necessary Consequences of Sin, than any 

express Judgment against it. But to represent
the Almighty as avenging the Sins
of the Guilty on the Innocent, was indecent,
if not blasphemous, as it was to represent
him acting against the first Principles
of natural Justice, and against the
original Notions of Right and Wrong,
which he himself had implanted in our
Minds; by which we were to judge not
only in all Matters which were not revealed,
but even of the Truth of Revelation
itself. He said, he knew many held
the same Principles with the Captain on
this Head; but he was himself firmly
convinced to the contrary, and would
provide in the same Manner for this poor
Infant, as if a legitimate Child had had the
Fortune to have been found in the same
Place.’ 
While the Captain was taking all Opportunities
to press these and such like Arguments
to remove the little Foundling from
Mr. Allworthy's, of whose Fondness for
him he began to be jealous, Mrs. Deborah
had made a Discovery, which in its Event
threatned at least to prove more fatal to poor
Tommy, than all the Reasonings of the
Captain. 

Whether the insatiable Curiosity of this
good Woman had carried her on to that
Business, or whether she did it to confirm
herself in the good Graces of Mrs. Blifil, who,
notwithstanding her outward Behaviour to
the Foundling, frequently abused the Infant
in private, and her Brother too for his
Fondness to it, I will not determine; but
she had now, as she conceived, fully detected
the Father of the Foundling. 
Now as this was a Discovery of great
Consequence, it may be necessary to trace
it from the Fountain-head. We shall therefore
very minutely lay open those previous
Matters by which it was produced; and for
that Purpose, we shall be obliged to reveal
all the Secrets of a little Family, with which
my Reader is at present entirely unacquainted; 
and of which the Oeconomy was so rare
and extraordinary, that I fear it will shock
the utmost Credulity of many married Persons. 




The Description of a domestic Government
founded upon Rules directly contrary to those
of Aristotle. 
My Reader may please to remember
he hath been informed that Jenny
Jones had lived some Years with a certain
Schoolmaster, who had, at her earnest Desire,
instructed her in Latin, in which, to
do justice to her Genius, she had so improved
herself, that she was become a better
Scholar than her Master. 
Indeed, tho' this poor Man had undertaken
a Profession to which Learning must
be allowed necessary, this was the least of
his Commendations. He was one of the
best-natured Fellows in the World, and was
at the same time Master of so much Pleasantry
and Humour that he was reputed the
Wit of the Country; and all the neighbouring
Gentlemen were so desirous of his Company,
that as denying was not his Talent,
he spent much Time at their Houses, which
he might with more Emolument have
spent in his School. 

It may be imagined, that a Gentleman so
qualified, and so disposed, was in no danger
of becoming formidable to the learned Seminaries
of Eton or Westminster. To speak
plainly, his Scholars were divided into two
Classes. In the upper of which was a young
Gentleman, the Son of a neighbouring
'Squire, who at the Age of Seventeen was just
entered into his Syntaxis; and in the lower
was a second Son of the same Gentleman,
who, together with seven Parish-boys, was
learning to read and write. 
The Stipend arising hence would hardly
have indulged the Schoolmaster in the Luxuries
of Life, had he not added to this Office
those of Clerk and Barber, and had not Mr.
Allworthy added to the whole an Annuity of
Ten Pound, which the poor Man received
every Christmas, and with which he was enabled
to chear his Heart during that sacred
Festival. 
Among his other Treasures, the Pedagogue
had a Wife whom he had married
out of Mr. Allworthy's Kitchen, for her Fortune,
viz. Twenty Pound, which she had
there amassed. 

This Woman was not very amiable in her
Person. Whether she sat to my Friend
Hogarth, or no, I will not determine; but
she exactly resembled the young Woman
who is pouring out her Mistress's Tea in
the third Picture of the Harlot's Progress. 
She was besides a profest Follower of that
notable Sect founded by Xantippe of old; 
by means of which, she became more formidable
in the School than her Husband:
for to confess the Truth, he was never Master
there, or any where else, in her Presence. 
Tho' her Countenance did not denote
much natural Sweetness of Temper, yet this
was perhaps somewhat soured by a Circumstance
which generally poisons matrimonial
Felicity. For Children are rightly called the
Pledges of Love; and her Husband, tho'
they had been married nine Years, had
given her no such Pledges; a Default for
which he had no Excuse, either from Age
or Health, being not yet thirty Years old,
and, what they call a jolly, brisk, young
Man. 
Hence arose another Evil which produced
no little Uneasiness to the poor Pedagogue, 

of whom she maintained so constant a Jealousy,
that he durst hardly speak to one
Woman in the Parish; for the least Degree
of Civility, or even Correspondence with
any Female, was sure to bring his Wife
upon her Back, and his own. 
In order to guard herself against matrimonial
Injuries in her own House, as she
kept one Maid Servant, she always took
Care to chuse her out of that Order of
Females, whose Faces are taken as a Kind of
Security for their Virtue; of which Number
Jenny Jones, as the Reader hath been before
informed, was one. 
As the Face of this young Woman might
be called pretty good Security of the before-mentioned
Kind, and as her Behaviour
had been always extremely modest; which
is the certain Consequence of Understanding
in Women; she had passed above four
Years at Mr. Partridge's, (for that was the
Schoolmaster's Name) without creating the
least Suspicion in her Mistress. Nay, she
had been treated with uncommon Kindness,
and her Mistress had permitted Mr. Partridge
to give her those Instructions, which
have been before commemorated. 

But it is with Jealousy, as with the Gout. 
When such Distempers are in the Blood,
there is never any Security against their
breaking out; and that often on the slightest
Occasions, and when least suspected. 
Thus it happened to Mrs. Partridge, who
had submitted four Years to her Husband's
teaching this young Woman, and had suffered
her often to neglect her Work, in order
to pursue her Learning. For passing by
one Day, as the Girl was reading, and her
Master leaning over her, the Girl, I know
not for what Reason, suddenly started up
from her Chair; and this was the first Time
that Suspicion ever entered into the Head
of her Mistress. 
This did not, however, at that Time,
discover itself, but lay lurking in her Mind,
like a concealed Enemy, who waits for a
Reinforcement of additional Strength, before
he openly declares himself, and proceeds
upon hostile Operations; and such
additional Strength soon arrived to corroborate
her Suspicion: For not long after, the
Husband and Wife being at Dinner, the
Master said to his Maid, Da mihi aliquid
Potum; upon which the poor Girl smiled, 

perhaps at the Badness of the Latin, and
when her Mistress cast her Eyes on her,
blushed, possibly with a Consciousness of
having laughed at her Master. Mrs. Partridge,
upon this, immediately fell into a
Fury, and discharged the Trencher on
which she was eating, at the Head of poor
Jenny, crying out, ‘You impudent Whore,
do you play Tricks with my Husband
before my Face?’ and, at the same
Instant, rose from her Chair, with a
Knife in her Hand, with which, most probably,
she would have excecuted very tragical
Vengeance, had not the Girl taken
the Advantage of being nearer the Door
than her Mistress, and avoided her Fury, by
running away; for, as to the poor Husband,
whether Surprize had rendered him
motionless, or Fear (which is full as probable)
had restrained him from venturing at
any Opposition, he sat staring and trembling
in his Chair; nor did he once offer to move
or speak, till his Wife returning from the
Pursuit of Jenny, made some defensive Measures
necessary for his own Preservation; 
and he likewise was obliged to retreat, after
the Example of the Maid. 
This good Woman was, no more than
Othello, of a Disposition, 

—To make a Life of Jealousy,
And follow still the Changes of the Moon
With fresh Suspicions—
with her, as well as him; 
—To be once in doubt
Was once to be resolved—
she therefore ordered Jenny immediately to
pack up her Alls, and be gone; for that she
was determined she should not sleep that
Night within her Walls. 
Mr. Partridge had profited too much, by
Experience, to interpose in a Matter of this
Nature. He therefore had Recourse to his
usual Recipe of Patience; for, tho' he was
not a great Adept in Latin, he remembered
and well understood the Advice contained
in these Words: 

—Leve fit, quod bene fertur Onus.
In English: ‘A Burden becomes lightest,
when is is well borne.’ 
Which he had always in his Mouth, and of
which, to say the Truth, he had often Occasion
to experience the Truth. 

Jenny offered to make Protestations of
her Innocence; but the Tempest was too
high for her to be heard. She then betook
herself to the Business of Packing, for which
a small Quantity of brown Paper sufficed; 
and, having received her small Pittance of
Wages, she returned home. 
The Schoolmaster and his Consort pass'd
their Time unpleasantly enough that Evening; 
but something or other happened before
the next Morning, which a little abated
the Fury of Mrs. Partridge; and she at
length admitted her Husband to make his
Excuses. To which she gave the readier
Belief, as he had, instead of desiring her to
recall Jenny, professed a Satisfaction in her
being dismissed, saying, She was grown of
little Use as a Servant, spending all her
Time in reading, and was become, moreover,
very pert and obstinate: For indeed
she and her Master had lately had frequent
Disputes in Literature; in which, as hath
been said, she was become greatly his Superior. 
This, however, he would by no
means allow; and, as he called her persisting
in the Right, Obstinacy, he began to
hate her with no small Inveteracy. 




Containing one of the most bloody Battles, or
rather Duels, that were ever recorded in
Domestic History. 
For the Reasons mentioned in the preceding
Chapter, and from some other
matrimonial Concessions, well known to
most Husbands; and which, like the Secrets
of Free Masonry, should be divulged to
none who are not Members of that honourable
Fraternity, Mrs. Partridge was pretty
well satisfied, that she had condemned her
Husband without Cause, and endeavoured,
by Acts of Kindness, to make him Amends
for her false Suspicion. Her Passions were,
indeed, equally violent, which ever Way
they inclined: for, as she could be extremely
angry, so could she be altogether as fond. 
But tho' these Passions ordinarily succeeded
each other, and scarce twenty-four
Hours ever passed in which the Pedagogue
was not, in some Degree, the Object of both; 
yet, on extraordinary Occasions, when the
Passion of Anger had raged very high, the
Remission was usually longer, and so was 

the Case at present; for she continued
longer in a State of Affability, after this Fit
of Jealousy was ended, than her Husband
had ever known before: And, had it not
been for some little Exercises, which all the
Followers of Xantippe are obliged to perform
daily, Mr. Partridge would have enjoyed
a perfect Serenity of several Months. 
Perfect Calms at Sea are always suspected
by the experienced Mariner to be the Forerunners
of a Storm: And I know some
Persons, who, without being generally the
Devotees of Superstition, are apt to apprehend,
that great and unusual Peace or
Tranquility, will be attended with its opposite: 
For which Reason the Antients used,
on such Occasions, to sacrifice to the Goddess
Nemesis; a Deity who was thought by
them to look with an invidious Eye on
human Felicity, and to have a peculiar Delight
in overturning it. 
As we are very far from believing in any
such Heathen Goddess, or from encouraging
any Superstition, so we wish Mr. John
Fr&wblank;, or some other such Philosopher,
would bestir himself a little, in order to find
out the real Cause of this sudden Transition,
from good to bad Fortune, which hath been 

so often remarked, and of which we shall
proceed to give an Instance; for it is our
Province to relate Facts, and we shall leave
Causes to Persons of much higher Genius. 
Mankind have always taken great Delight
in knowing and descanting on the
Actions of others. Hence there have been,
in all Ages, and Nations, certain Places set
apart for public Rendezvous, where the
Curious might meet, and satisfy their mutual
Curiosity. Among these, the Barbers
Shops have justly bore  the Pre-eminence. 
Among the Greeks, Barbers News was a
proverbial Expression, and Horace, in one
of his Epistles, makes honourable Mention
of the Roman Barbers in the same Light. 
Those of England are known to be no
wise inferior to their Greek or Roman Predecessors. 
You there see foreign Affairs discussed
in a Manner little inferior to that
with which they are handled in the Coffee-houses; 
and domestick Occurrences are
much more largely and freely treated in the
former, than in the latter. But this serves
only for the Men. Now, whereas the Females
of this Country, especially those of
the lower Order, do associate themselves
much more than those of other Nations, 

our Polity would be highly deficient, if they
had not some Place set apart likewise for the
Indulgence of their Curiosity, seeing they
are in this no way inferior to the other
half of the Species. 
In enjoying, therefore, such Place of
Rendezvous, the British Fair ought to
esteem themselves more happy than any of
their foreign Sisters; as I do not remember
either to have read in History, or to have
seen in my Travels, any thing of the like
Kind. 
This Place then is no other than the
Chandler's Shop; the known Seat of all the
News; or, as it is vulgarly called, Gossiping,
in every Parish in England. 
Mrs. Partridge being one Day at this Assembly
of Females, was asked by one of her
Neighbours, if she had heard no News
lately of Jenny Jones. To which she answered
in the negative. Upon this, the
other replied, with a Smile, That the Parish
was very much obliged to her for having
turned Jenny away as she did. 
Mrs. Partridge, whose Jealousy, as the
Reader well knows, was long since cured, 

and who had no other Quarrel to her Maid,
answered boldly, She did not know any
Obligation the Parish had to her on that
Account, for she believed Jenny had scarce
left her Equal behind her. 
‘No, truly, said the Gossip, I hope
not, tho' I fancy we have Sluts enow too.’ 
‘Then you have not heard, it seems, that
she hath been brought to bed of two Bastards; 
but as they are not born here, my
Husband, and the other Overseer, says
we shall not be obliged to keep them.’ 
‘Two Bastards!’ answered Mrs. Partridge
hastily, ‘you surprize me. I don't know
whether we must keep them; but I am
sure they must have been begotten here,
for the Wench hath not been nine Months
gone away.’ 
Nothing can be so quick and sudden as
the Operations of the Mind, especially when
Hope, or Fear; or Jealousy to which the
two others are but Journeymen, set it to
work. It occurred instantly to her, that Jenny
had scarce ever been out of her own House,
while she lived with her. The leaning over
the Chair, the sudden starting up, the Latin,
the Smile, and many other Things 

rushed upon her all at once. The Satisfaction
her Husband expressed in the
Departure of Jenny, appeared now to be
only dissembled; again, in the same Instant,
to be real, and yet to confirm her Jealousy,
as proceeding from Satiety, and a hundred
other bad Causes. In a Word, she was
convinced of her Husband's Guilt, and immediately
left the Assembly in Confusion. 
As fair Grimalkin, who, though the
youngest of the Feline Family, degenerates
not in Ferosity from the elder Branches of
her House, and, though inferior in Strength,
is equal in Fierceness to the noble Tyger
himself, when a little Mouse, whom it hath
long tormented in Sport, escapes from her
Clutches for a while, frets, scolds, growls,
swears; but if the Trunk, or Box, behind
which the Mouse lay hid, be again removed,
she flies like Lightning on her
Prey, and, with envenomed Wrath, bites,
scratches, mumbles, and tears the little
Animal. 
Not with less Fury did Mrs. Partridge
fly on the poor Pedagogue. Her Tongue,
Teeth, and Hands, fell all upon him at
once. His Wig was in an Instant torn from
his Head, his Shirt from his Back, and 

from his Face descended five Streams of Blood,
denoting the Number of Claws with which
Nature had unhappily armed the Enemy. 
Mr. Partridge acted for some Time on
the defensive only; indeed he attempted
only to guard his Face with his Hands; 
but as he found that his Antagonist abated
nothing of her Rage, he thought he might,
at least, endeavour to disarm her, or rather to
confine her Arms; in doing which, her Cap
fell off in the Struggle, and her Hair being
too short to reach her Shoulders, erected
itself on her Head; her Stays likewise,
which were laced through one single Hole
at the Bottom, burst open, and her Breasts,
which were much more redundant than her
Hair, hung down below her Middle; her
Face was likewise marked with the Blood of
her Husband; her Teeth gnashed with Rage; 
and Fire, such as sparkles from a Smith's
Forge, darted from her Eyes. So that,
altogether, this Amazonian Heroine might
have been an Object of Terror to a much
bolder Man than Mr. Partridge. 
He had, at length, the good Fortune,
by getting Possession of her Arms, to render
those Weapons, which she wore at the
Ends of her Fingers, useless; which she no 

sooner perceived, than the Softness of her
Sex prevailed over her Rage, and she presently
dissolved in Tears, which soon after
concluded in a Fit. 
That small Share of Sense which Mr. Partridge
had hitherto preserved through this
Scene of Fury, of the Cause of which he
was hitherto ignorant, now utterly abandoned
him. He ran instantly into the Street,
hollowing out, that his Wife was in the
Agonies of Death, and beseeching the
Neighbours to fly with the utmost Haste to
her Assistance. Several good Women obeyed
his Summons, who entering his House,
and applying the usual Remedies on such
Occasions, Mrs. Partridge was, at length,
to the great Joy of her Husband, brought
to herself. 
As soon as she had a little recollected her
Spirits, and somewhat composed herself with
a Cordial, she began to inform the Company
of the manifold Injuries she had received
from her Husband; who, she said, was
not contented to injure her in her Bed; but,
upon her upbraiding him with it, had treated
her in the cruelest Manner imaginable; had
tore her Cap and Hair from her Head, and
her Stays from her Body, giving her, at 

the same Time, several Blows, the Marks
of which she should carry to the Grave. 
The poor Man, who bore on his Face
many more visible Marks of the Indignation
of his Wife, stood in silent Astonishment at
this Accusation; which the Reader will, I
believe, bear Witness for him, had greatly
exceeded the Truth; for indeed he had not
struck her once; and this Silence being interpreted
to be a Confession of the Charge,
by the whole Court, they all began at once,
una voce, to rebuke and revile him, repeating
often, that none but a Coward ever
struck a Woman. 
Mr. Partridge bore all this patiently; but
when his Wife appealed to the Blood on
her Face, as an Evidence of his Barbarity,
he could not help laying Claim to his own
Blood, for so it really was; as he thought
it very unnatural, that this should rise up
(as we are taught that of a murdered Person
often doth) in Vengeance against him. 
To this the Women made no other Answer,
than that it was Pity it had not come
from his Heart, instead of his Face; all
declaring, that if their Husbands should
lift their Hands against them, they would 

have their Heart's Bloods out of their Bodies. 
After much Admonition for what was
past, and much good Advice to Mr. Partridge
for his future Behaviour, the Company,
at length, departed, and left the
Husband and Wife to a personal Conference
together, in which Mr. Partridge soon
learned the Cause of all his Sufferings. 



Containing much Matter to exercise the Judgment
and Reflection of the Reader. 
I believe it is a true Observation, that few
Secrets are divulged to one Person only; 
but certainly, it would be next to a Miracle,
that a Fact of this Kind should be known
to a whole Parish, and not transpire any
farther. 
And, indeed, a very few Days had
past, before the Country, to use a common
Phrase, rung of the Schoolmaster of Little
Baddington; who was said to have beaten
his Wife in the most cruel Manner. Nay,
in some Places, it was reported he had murdered 

her; in others, that he had broke her
Arms; in others, her Legs; in short, there
was scarce an Injury which can be done to a
human Creature, but what Mrs. Partridge
was somewhere or other affirmed to have
received from her Husband. 
The Cause of this Quarrel was likewise
variously reported; for, as some People
said that Mrs. Partridge had caught her
Husband in Bed with his Maid, so many
other Reasons, of a very different Kind,
went abroad. Nay, some transferred the
Guilt to the Wife, and the Jealousy to the
Husband. 
Mrs. Wilkins had long ago heard of this
Quarrel; but, as a different Cause from the
true one had reached her Ears, she thought
proper to conceal it; and the rather, perhaps,
as the Blame was universally laid on
Mr. Partridge; and his Wife, when she
was Servant to Mr. Allworthy, had in something
offended Mrs. Wilkins, who was not
of a very forgiving Temper. 
But Mrs. Wilkins, whose Eyes could see
Objects at a Distance, and who could very
well look forward a few Years into Futurity,
had perceived a strong Likelihood of Captain 

Blifil's being hereafter her Master; and,
as she plainly discerned, that the Captain
bore no great Good-will to the little Foundling,
she fancied it would be rendering him
an agreeable Service, if she could make any
Discoveries that might lessen the Affection
which Mr. Allworthy seemed to have
contracted for this Child, and which gave
visible Uneasiness to the Captain; who
could not entirely conceal it even before Allworthy
himself; though his Wife, who
acted her Part much better in public, frequently
recommended to him her own
Example, of conniving at the Folly of her
Brother, which, she said, she at least as
well perceived, and as much relented as any
other possibly could. 
Mrs. Wilkins having therefore, by Accident,
gotten a true Scent of the above Story,
though long after it had happened, failed
not to satisfy herself thoroughly of all the
Particulars, and then acquainted the Captain,
that she had at last discovered the true
Father of the little Bastard, which she was
sorry, she said, to see her Master lose his
Reputation in the Country, by taking so
much Notice of. 

The Captain chid her for the Conclusion
of her Speech, as an improper Assurance in
judging of her Master's Actions: For if his
Honour, or his Understanding, would have
suffered the Captain to make an Alliance with
Mrs. Wilkins, his Pride would by no means
have admitted it. And, to say the Truth,
there is no Conduct less politic, than to
enter into any Confederacy with your
Friend's Servants, against their Master. 
For, by these Means, you afterwards become
the Slave of these very Servants; by
whom you are constantly liable to be betrayed. 
And this Consideration, perhaps,
it was which prevented Captain Blifil from
being more explicite with Mrs. Wilkins; 
or from encouraging the Abuse which she
had bestowed on Allworthy. 
But though he declared no Satisfaction
to Mrs. Wilkins at this Discovery, he enjoyed
not a little from it in his own Mind,
and resolved to make the best Use of it he
was able. 
He kept this Matter a long Time concealed
within his own Breast, in Hopes that
Mr. Allworthy might hear it from some other 

Person; but Mrs. Wilkins, whether she resented
the Captain's Behaviour, or whether
his Cunning was beyond her, and she
feared the Discovery might displease him,
never afterwards opened her Lips about the
Matter. 
I have thought it somewhat strange, upon
Reflection, that the House-keeper never
acquainted Mrs. Blifil with this News, as
Women are more inclined to communicate
all Pieces of Intelligence to their own
Sex, than to ours. The only Way, as it
appears to me, of solving this Difficulty, is,
by imputing it to that Distance which was
now grown between the Lady and the
House-keeper: Whether this arose from a
Jealousy in Mrs. Blifil, that Wilkins shewed
too great a Respect to the Foundling; for
while she was endeavouring to ruin the little
Infant, in order to ingratiate herself with
the Captain, she was every Day more and
more commending it before Allworthy, as
his Fondness for it every Day encreased. 
This, notwithstanding all the Care she took
at other Times to express the direct contrary
to Mrs. Blifil, perhaps offended that
delicate Lady, who certainly now hated
Mrs. Wilkins; and though she did not, or 

possibly could not, absolutely remove her,
from her Place, she found, however, the Means
of making her Life very uneasy. This
Mrs. Wilkins, at length, so resented, that
she very openly shewed all Manner of Respect
and Fondness to little Tommy, in Opposition
to Mrs. Blifil. 
The Captain, therefore, finding the Story
in Danger of perishing, he at last took an
Opportunity to reveal it himself. 
He was one Day engaged with Mr. Allworthy
in a Discourse on Charity: In which
the Captain, with great Learning, proved
to Mr. Allworthy, that the Word Charity,
in Scripture, no where means Beneficence,
or Generosity. 
‘The Christian Religion, he said, was
instituted for much nobler Purposes, than
to enforce a Lesson which many Heathen
Philosophers had taught us long before,
and which, though it might, perhaps, be
called a moral Virtue, favoured but little
of that sublime Christian-like Disposition,
that vast Elevation of Thought, in Purity
approaching to angelic Perfection, to be
attained, expressed, and felt only by
Grace. Those (he said) came nearer to 

the Scripture Meaning, who understood
by it Candour, or the forming of a benevolent
Opinion of our Brethren, and passing
a favourable Judgment on their
Actions; a Virtue much higher, and more
extensive in its Nature, than a pitiful Distribution
of Alms, which, though we
would never so much prejudice, or even
ruin our Families, could never reach
many; whereas Charity, in the other and
truer Sense, might be extended to all
Mankind.’ 
He said, ‘Considering who the Disciples
were, it would be absurd to conceive the
Doctrine of Generosity, or giving Alms,
to have been preached to them. And,
as we could not well imagine this Doctrine
should be preached by its divine Author
to Men who could not practise it, much
less shall we think it understood so by
those who can practise it, and do not.’ 
‘But though, continued he, there is,
I am afraid, little Merit in these Benefactions; 
there would, I must confess, be
much Pleasure in them to a good Mind,
if it was not abated by one Consideration. 
I mean, that we are liable to be imposed
upon, and to confer our choicest Favours 

often on the Undeserving, as you must
own was your Case in your Bounty to that
worthless Fellow Partridge: For two or
three such Examples must greatly lessen
the inward Satisfaction, which a good
Man would otherwise find in Generosity; 
nay, may even make him timorous
in bestowing, lest he should be
guilty of supporting Vice, and encouraging
the Wicked; a Crime of a very black
Dye, and for which it will by no means
be a sufficient Excuse, that we have not
actually intended such an Encouragement; 
unless we have used the utmost Caution
in chusing the Objects of our Beneficence. 
A Consideration which, I make
no Doubt, hath greatly checked the Liberality
of many a worthy and pious Man.’ 
Mr. Allworthy answered, ‘He could not
dispute with the Captain in the Greek Language,
and therefore could say nothing as
to the true Sense of the Word, which is
translated Charity; but that he had always
thought it was interpreted to consist
in Action, and that giving Alms constituted
at least one Branch of that
Virtue. 

‘As to the meritorious Part, he said, he
readily agreed with the Captain; for where
could be the Merit of barely discharging
a Duty; which he said, let the Word
Charity have what Construction it would,
it sufficiently appeared to be from the
whole Tenure of the New Testament. 
And as he thought it an indispensable
Duty, enjoined both by the Christian Law,
and by the Law of Nature itself; so was
it withal so pleasant, that if any Duty
could be said to be its own Reward, or to
pay us while we were discharging it, it
was this.’ 
‘To confess the Truth, said he, there is
one Degree of Generosity, (of Charity I
would have called it) which seems to have
some Shew of Merit, and that is, where
from a Principle of Benevolence, and
Christian Love, we bestow on another what
we really want ourselves; where, in order
to lessen the Distresses of another, we condescend
to share some Part of them by giving
what even our own Necessities cannot
well spare. This is, I think, meritorious; 
but to relieve our Brethren only with our
Superfluities; to be charitable (I must use
the Word) rather at the Expence of our 

Coffers than ourselves; to save several
Families from Misery rather than hang up
an extraordinary Picture in our Houses,
or gratify any other idle, ridiculous Vanity,
this seems to be only being Christians,
nay indeed, only being human
Creatures. Nay, I will venture to go farther,
it is being in some degree Epicures: 
For what could the greatest Epicure wish
rather than to eat with many Mouths instead
of one; which I think may be predicated
of any one who knows that the
Bread of many is owing to his own Largesses.’ 
“As to the Apprehension of bestowing
Bounty on such as may hereafter prove
unworthy Objects, because many have
proved such; surely it can never deter a
good Man from Generosity: I do not
think a few or many Examples of Ingratitude
can justify a Man's hardening his
Heart against the Distresses of his Fellow-Creatures; 
nor do I believe it can ever
have such Effect on a truly benevolent
Mind. Nothing less than a Persuasion
of universal Depravity can lock up the
Charity of a good Man; and this Persuasion
must lead him, I think, either
into Atheism, or Enthusiasm; but surely 

it is unfair to argue such universal Depravity
from a few vicious Individuals; nor
was this, I believe, ever done by a Man,
who upon searching his own Mind found
one certain Exception to the general Rule. 
He then concluded by asking who that
Partridge was whom he had called a
worthless Fellow.’ 
‘I mean, said the Captain, Partridge,
the Barber, the Schoolmaster, what do
you call him? Partridge, the Father of the
the little Child which you found in your
Bed.’ 
Mr. Allworthy exprest great Surprise at
this Account, and the Captain as great at
his Ignorance of it: For he said, he had
known it above a Month, and at length recollected
with much Difficulty that he was
told it by Mrs. Wilkins. 
Upon this, Wilkins was immediately summoned,
who having confirmed what the
Captain had said, was by Mr. Allworthy,
by and with the Captain's Advice, dispatched
to Little Baddington to inform herself
of the Truth of the Fact: For the Captain
exprest great Dislike at all hasty Proceedings
in criminal Matters, and said he 

would by no means have Mr. Allworthy
take any Resolution either to the Prejudice
of the Child or its Father, before he was satisfied
that the latter was guilty: For tho'
he had privately satisfied himself of this from
one of Partridge's Neighbours, yet he was
too generous to give any such Evidence to
Mr. Allworthy. 



The Trial of Partridge, the Schoolmaster, for
Incontinency; The Evidence of his Wife; 
A short Reflection on the Wisdom of our
Law; with other grave Matters, which
those will like best who understand them
most. 
It may be wondered that a Story so well
known, and which had furnished so
much Matter of Conversation, should never
have been mentioned to Mr. Allworthy himself,
who was perhaps the only Person in
that Country who had never heard of it. 
To account in some measure for this to
the Reader, I think proper to inform him
that there was no one in the Kingdom less
interested in opposing that Doctrine concerning 

the Meaning of the Word Charity,
which hath been seen in the preceding Chapter,
than our good Man. Indeed, he was
equally intitled to this Virtue in either Sense: 
For as no Man was ever more sensible of
the Wants, or more ready to relieve the
Distresses of others, so none could be more
tender of their Characters, or slower to believe
any thing to their Disadvantage. 
Scandal, therefore, never found any Access
to his Table: For as it hath been long
since observed that you may know a Man
by his Companions; so I will venture to
say, that by attending to the Conversation
at a great Man's Table, you may satisfy
yourself of his Religion, his Politics, his
Taste, and indeed of his entire Disposition: 
For tho' a few odd Fellows will utter their
own Sentiments in all Places, yet much the
greater Part of Mankind have enough of
the Courtier to accommodate their Conversation
to the Taste and Inclination of their
Superiors. 
But to return to Mrs. Wilkins, who having
executed her Commission with great
Dispatch, tho' at fifteen Miles Distance,
brought back such a Confirmation of the
Schoolmaster's Guilt, that Mr. Allworthy 

determined to send for the Criminal, and
examine him viva voce. Mr. Partridge,
therefore, was summoned to attend, in order
to his Defence (if he could make any)
against this Accusation. 
At the Time appointed, before Mr. Allworthy
himself, at Paradise-Hall, came as
well the said Partridge, with Anne his Wife,
as Mrs. Wilkins, his Accuser. 
And now Mr. Allworthy being seated in
the Chair of Justice, Mr. Partridge was
brought before him. Having heard his Accusation
from the Mouth of Mrs. Wilkins,
he pleaded, Not guilty, making many vehement
Protestations of his Innocence. 
Mrs. Partridge was then examined, who,
after a modest Apology for being obliged
to speak the Truth against her Husband,
related all the Circumstances with which the
Reader hath already been acquainted; and
at last concluded with her Husband's Confession
of his Guilt. 
Whether she had forgiven him or no, I
will not venture to determine: But it is certain,
she was an unwilling Witness in this
Cause, and it is probable, from certain other 

Reasons would never have been brought
to depose as she did, had not Mrs. Wilkins,
with great Art, fished all out of her, at her
own House, and had she not indeed made
Promises in Mr. Allworthy's Name, that the
Punishment of her Husband should not be
such as might any wise affect his Family. 
Partridge still persisted in asserting his Innocence,
tho' he admitted he had made the
above mentioned Confession; which he however
endeavoured to account for, by protesting
that he was forced into it by the continued
Importunity she used, who vowed,
that as she was sure of his Guilt, she would
never leave tormenting him till he had
owned it, and faithfully promised, that in
such Case, she would never mention it to
him more. Hence, he said, he had been
induced falsely to confess himself guilty, tho'
he was innocent; and that he believed he
should have confest a Murder from the same
Motive. 
Mrs. Partridge could not bear this Imputation
with Patience; and having no other
Remedy, in the present Place but Tears,
she called forth a plentiful Assistance from
them, and then addressing herself to Mr.
Allworthy, she said, (or rather cried) ‘May 

it please your Worship, there never was
any poor Woman so injured as I am by
that base Man: For this is not the only
Instance of his Falshood to me. No, may
it please your Worship, he hath injured
my Bed many's the good time and often. 
I could have put up with his Drunkenness
and Neglect of his Business, if he had not
broke one of the sacred Commandiments. 
Besides, if it had been out of Doors I had
not mattered it so much; but with my
own Servant, in my own House, under
my own Roof; to defile my own chaste
Bed, which to be sure he hath with his
beastly stinking Whores. Yes, you Villain,
you have defiled my own Bed, you
have; and then you have charged me with
bullocking you into owning the Truth. It
is very likely, an't please your Worship,
that I should bullock him. —I have Marks
enow about my Body to shew of his Cruelty
to me. If you had been a Man, you
Villain, you would have scorned to injure
a Woman in that Manner. But you an't
half a Man, you know it. —Nor have you
been half a Husband to me. You need
run after Whores, you need, when I'm
sure—And since he provokes me, I
am ready, an't please your Worship, to
take my bodily Oath, that I found them 

a-bed together. What, you have forgot,
I suppose, when you beat me into a Fit,
and made the Blood run down my Forehead,
because I only civilly taxed you
with your Adultery! but I can prove it by
all my Neighbours. You have almost
broke my Heart, you have, you have.” 
Here Mr. Allworthy interrupted, and
begged her to be pacified, promising her
that she should have Justice; then turning
to Partridge, who stood aghast, one half of
his Wits being hurried away by Surprise
and the other half by Fear, he said, he was
sorry to see there was so wicked a Man in
the World. He assured him, that his prevaricating
and lying backward and forward
was a great Aggravation of his Guilt: 
For which, the only Attonement he could
make was by Confession and Repentance. 
He exhorted him, therefore, to begin by
immediately confessing the Fact, and not
to persist in denying what was so plainly
proved against him, even by his own Wife. 
Here, Reader, I beg your Patience a
Moment, while I make a just Compliment
to the great Wisdom and Sagacity of our
Law, which refuses to admit the Evidence of
a Wife for or against her Husband. This, 

says a certain learned Author, who, I believe,
was never quoted before in any but
a Law-book, would be the Means of creating
an eternal Dissention between them. 
It would, indeed, be the Means of much
Perjury, and of much Whipping, Fining,
Imprisoning, Transporting, and Hanging. 
Partridge stood a while silent, till being
bid to speak, he said, he had already spoken
the Truth, and appealed to Heaven for his
Innocence, and lastly, to the Girl herself,
whom he desired his Worship immediately
to send for; for he was ignorant, or at least
pretended to be so, that she had left that
Part of the Country. 
Mr. Allworthy, whose natural Love of
Justice, joined to his Coolness of Temper,
made him always a most patient Magistrate
in hearing all the Witnesses which an accused
Person could produce in his Defence,
agreed to defer his final Determination of this
Matter, till the Arrival of Jenny, for whom
he immediately dispatched a Messenger; and
then having recommended Peace between
Partridge and his Wife (tho' he addressed
himself chiefly to the wrong Person) he appointed
them to attend again the third 

Day: For he had sent Jenny a whole Day's
Journey from his own House. 
At the appointed Time the Parties all assembled,
when the Messenger returning
brought word, that Jenny was not to be
found: For that she had left her Habitation
a few Days before, in company with a
recruiting Officer. 
Mr. Allworthy then declared, that the Evidence
of such a Slut as she appeared to be,
would have deserved no Credit; but he said
he could not help thinking that had she been
present, and would have declared the Truth,
she must have confirmed what so many Circumstances,
together with his own Confession,
and the Declaration of his Wife, that she
had caught her Husband in the Fact, did
sufficiently prove. He therefore once more
exhorted Partridge to confess; but he still
avowing his Innocence, Mr. Allworthy declared
himself satisfied of his Guilt, and that
he was too bad a Man to receive any Encouragement
from him. He therefore deprived
him of his Annuity, and recommended
Repentance to him, on account of
another World, and Industry to maintain
himself and his Wife in this. 

There were not, perhaps, many more
unhappy Persons, than poor Partridge. He
had lost the best Part of his Income by the
Evidence of his Wife, and yet was daily
upbraided by her for having, among other
Things, been the Occasion of depriving her
of that Benefit; but such was his Fortune,
and he was obliged to submit to it. 
Tho' I called him, poor Partridge, in
the last Paragraph, I would have the Reader
rather impute that Epithet to the Compassion
in my Temper, than conceive it to be
any Declaration of his Innocence. Whether
he was innocent or not, will perhaps appear
hereafter; but if the Historic-Muse hath
entrusted me with any Secrets, I will by no
means be guilty of discovering them till she
shall give me leave. 
Here therefore, the Reader must suspend
his Curiosity. Certain it is, that whatever
was the Truth of the Case, there was Evidence
more than sufficient to convict him before
Allworthy; indeed much less would have
satisfied a Bench of Justices on an Order of
Bastardy; and yet, notwithstanding the
Positiveness of Mrs. Partridge, who would
have taken the Sacrament upon the Matter, 

there is a Possibility that the Schoolmaster was
entirely innocent: For tho' it appeared clear,
on comparing the Time when Jenny departed
from Little Baddington, with that of her Delivery,
that she had there conceived this Infant,
yet it by no means followed, of Necessity,
that Partridge muff have been its Father: 
For, to omit other Particulars, there was in the
same House a Lad near Eighteen, between
whom, and Jenny, there had subsisted sufficient
Intimacy to found a reasonable Suspicion; 
and yet, so blind is Jealousy, this
Circumstance never once entered into the
Head of the enraged Wife. 
Whether Partridge repented or not, according
to Mr. Allworthy's Advice, is not
so apparent. Certain it is, that his Wife
repented heartily of the Evidence she had
given against him; especially when she
found Mrs. Deborah had deceived her, and
refused to make any Application to Mr.
Allworthy on her Behalf. She had, however,
somewhat better Success with Mrs.
Blifil, who was, as the Reader must have
perceived, a much better-tempered Woman; 
and very kindly undertook to solicit her Brother
to restore the Annuity. In which, tho'
Good-nature might have some Share, yet a 

stronger and more natural Motive will appear
in the next Chapter. 
These Solicitations were nevertheless unsuccessful: 
For tho' Mr. Allworthy did not
think, with some late Writers, that Mercy
consists only in punishing Offenders; yet he
was as far from thinking that it is proper to
this excellent Quality to pardon great Criminals
wantonly, without any Reason whatever. 
Any Doubtfulness of the Fact, or
any Circumstance of Mitigation was never
disregarded; but the Petitions of an Offender,
or the Intercessions of others, did
not in the least affect him. In a word, he
never pardoned, because the Offender himself,
or his Friends, were unwilling that he
should be punished. 
Partridge and his Wife were therefore
both obliged to submit to their Fate; which
was indeed severe enough: For so far was
he from doubling his Industry on the account
of his lessened Income, that he did in a manner
abandon himself to despair; and as he was
by Nature indolent, that Vice now increased
upon him, by which means he lost the little
School he had; so that neither his Wife nor
himself would have had any Bread to eat, had
not the Charity of some good Christian interposed, 

and provided them with what was
just sufficient for their Sustenance. 
As this Support was conveyed to them
by an unknown Hand, they imagined, and so,
I doubt not, will the Reader, that Mr. Allworthy
himself was their secret Benefactor; 
who, though he would not openly encourage
Vice, could yet privately relieve the
Distresses of the Vicious themselves, when
these became too exquisite and disproportionate
to their Merit. In which Light, their
Wretchedness appeared now to Fortune herself; 
for she at length took pity on this miserable
Couple, and considerably lessened
the wretched State of Partridge, by putting
a final end to that of his Wife, who soon
after caught the Small-Pox, and died. 
The Justice which Mr. Allworthy had
executed on Partridge, at first met with
universal Approbation; but no sooner had
he felt its Consequences, than his Neighbours
began to relent, and to compassionate
his Case; and presently after, to blame
that as Rigour and Severity, which they before
called Justice. They now exclaimed
against punishing in cold Blood, and sang
forth the Praises of Mercy and Forgiveness. 

These Cries were considerably increased by
the Death of Mrs. Partridge, which, tho'
owing to the Distemper above mentioned
which is no Consequence of Poverty or Distress,
many were not ashamed to impute
to Mr. Allworthy's Severity, or, as they now
termed it, Cruelty. 
Partridge, having now lost his Wife, his
School, and his Annuity, and the unknown
Person having now discontinued the last-mentioned
Charity, resolved to change the
Scene, and left the Country, where he was
in Danger of starving with the universal
Compassion of all his Neighbours. 



A short Sketch of that Felicity which prudent
Couples may extract from Hatred; with a
short Apology for those People who overlook
Imperfections in their Friends. 
Tho' the Captain had effectually demolished
poor Partridge, yet had he
not reaped the Harvest he hoped for, which
was to turn the Foundling out of Mr. Allworthy's
House. 

On the contrary, that Gentleman grew
every Day fonder of little Tommy, as if he intended
to counterbalance his Severity to the
Father with extraordinary Fondness and Affection
towards the Son. 
This a good deal soured the Captain's
Temper, as did all the other daily Instances
of Mr. Allworthy's Generosity: For he
looked on all such Largesses to be Diminutions
of his own Wealth. 
In this, we have said, he did not agree
with his Wife; nor indeed, in any thing
else: For tho' an Affection placed on the
Understanding is by many wise Persons
thought much more durable than that which
is founded on Beauty, yet it happened
otherwise in the present Case. Nay, the Understandings
of this Couple were their principal
Bone of Contention, and one great
Cause of many Quarrels which from time to
time arose between them; and which at last
ended, on the Side of the Lady, in a sovereign
Contempt for her Husband, and on the
Husband's, in an utter Abhorrence of his
Wife. 

As these had both exercised their Talents
chiefly in the Study of Divinity, this was,
from their first Acquaintance, the most
common Topic of Conversation between
them. The Captain, like a well-bred Man,
had, before Marriage, always given up his
Opinion to that of the Lady; and this, not
in the clumsy, aukward Manner of a conceited
Blockhead, who, while he civilly
yields to a Superiour in an Argument, is
desirous of being still known to think himself
in the Right. The Captain, on the
contrary, tho' one of the proudest Fellows
in the World, so absolutely yielded the
Victory to his Antagonist, that she, who
had not the least Doubt of his Sincerity, retired
always from the Dispute with an Admiration
of her own Understanding, and a
Love for his. 
But tho' this Complaisance to one whom
the Captain thoroughly despised, was not so
uneasy to him, as it would have been, had
any Hopes of Preferment made it necessary
to shew the same Submission to a Hoadley,
or to some other of great Reputation in the
Science, yet even this cost him too much
to be endured without some Motive. Matrimony,
therefore, having removed all such 

Motives, he grew weary of this Condescention,
and began to treat the Opinions of his
Wife with that Haughtiness and Insolence,
which none but those who deserve some
Contempt themselves can bestow, and those
only who deserve no Contempt can bear. 
When the first Torrent of Tenderness was
over, and when in the calm and long Interval
between the Fits, Reason began to open
the Eyes of the Lady, and she saw this Alteration
of Behaviour in the Captain, who
at length answered all her Arguments only
with Pish and Pshaw, she was far from enduring
the Indignity with a tame Submission. 
Indeed, it at first so highly provoked
her, that it might have produced some tragical
Event, had it not taken a more harmless
Turn, by filling her with the utmost
Contempt for her Husband's Understanding,
which somewhat qualified her Hatred towards
him; tho' of this likewise, she had a pretty
moderate Share. 
The Captain's Hatred to her was of a
purer Kind: For as to any Imperfections in
her Knowledge or Understanding, he no
more despised her for them than for her not
being six Feet high. In his Opinion of the
female Sex, he exceeded the Moroseness of 

Aristotle himself. He looked on a Woman
as on an Animal of domestic Use, of somewhat
higher Consideration than a Cat, since
her Offices were of rather more Importance; 
but the Difference between these two, was
in his Estimation so small, that in his Marriage
contracted with Mr. Allworthy's Lands
and Tenements, it would have been pretty
equal which of them he had taken into the
Bargain. And yet so tender was his Pride,
that it felt the Contempt which his Wife
now began to express towards him; and this,
added to the Surfeit he had before taken of
her Love, created in him a Degree of Disgust
and Abhorrence, perhaps hardly to be
exceeded. 
One Situation only of the married State
is excluded from Pleasure; and that is, a
State of Indifference; but as many of my
Readers, I hope, know what an exquisite
Delight there is in conveying Pleasure to a
beloved Object, so some few, I am afraid,
may have experienced the Satisfaction of
tormenting one we hate. It is, I apprehend,
to come at this latter Pleasure, that we see
both Sexes often give up that Ease in Marriage,
which they might otherwise possess,
tho' their Mate was never so disagreeable
to them. Hence the Wife often puts on 

Fits of Love and Jealousy, nay, even denies
herself any Pleasure, to disturb and
prevent those of her Husband; and he again,
in return, puts frequent Restraints on
himself, and stays at home in Company
which he dislikes,in order to confine his
Wife to what she equally detests. Hence
too must flow those Tears which a Widow
sometimes so plentifully sheds over the
Ashes of a Husband with whom she led a
Life of constant Disquiet and Turbulency,
and whom now she can never hope to torment
any more. 
But if ever any Couple enjoyed this Pleasure,
it was at present experienced by the Captain
and his Lady. It was always a sufficient
Reason to either of them to be obstinate in
any Opinion, that the other had previously
asserted the contrary. If the one proposed
any Amusement, the other constantly objected
to it. They never loved or hated,
commended or abused the same Person. 
And for this Reason, as the Captain looked
with an evil Eye on the little Foundling,
his Wife began now to caress it almost equally
with her own Child. 
The Reader will be apt to conceive, that
this Behaviour between the Husband and 

Wife did not greatly contribute to Mr. Allworthy's
Repose, as it tended so little to that
serene Happiness which he had proposed to
all three, from this Alliance; but the Truth
is, though he might be a little disappointed
in his sanguine Expectations, yet he was far
from being acquainted with the whole Matter: 
For, as the Captain was, from certain
obvious Reasons, much on his Guard before
him, the Lady was obliged, for fear of her
Brother's Displeasure, to pursue the same
Conduct. In fact, it is possible for a
third Person to be very intimate, nay even
to live long in the same House, with a married
Couple, who have any tolerable Discretion,
and not even guess at the sour
Sentiments which they bear to each other: 
For though the whole Day may be sometimes
too short for Hatred, as well as for
Love; yet the many Hours which they
naturally spend together, apart from all
Observers, supply People of tolerable Moderation
with such ample Opportunity for the
Enjoyment of either Passion, that, if they
love, they can support being a few Hours
in Company, without toying, or if they
hate, without spitting in each others Faces. 
It is possible, however, that Mr. Allworthy
saw enough to render him a little uneasy; 

for we are not always to conclude,
that a wise Man is not hurt, because he
doth not cry out and lament himself, like
those of a childish or effeminate Temper. 
But indeed it is possible he might see some
Faults in the Captain, without any Uneasiness
at all: For Men of true Wisdom and
Goodness are contented to take Persons and
Things as they are, without complaining
of their Imperfections, or attempting to
amend them. They can see a Fault in a
Friend, a Relation, or an Acquaintance,
without ever mentioning it to the Parties
themselves, or to any others; and this often
without the least lessening their Affection. 
Indeed unless great Discernment be tempered
with this overlooking Disposition, we ought
never to contract Friendship but with a
Degree of Folly which we can deceive: For
I hope my Friends will pardon me, when I
declare I know none of them without a
Fault; and I should be sorry if I could
imagine I had any Friend who could not
see mine. Forgiveness, of this Kind, we
give and demand in Turn. It is an Exercise
of Friendship, and, perhaps, none of
the least pleasant. And this Forgiveness
we must bestow, without Desire of Amendment. 
There is, perhaps, no surer Mark
of Folly, than an Attempt to correct the 

natural Infirmities of those we love. The
finest Composition of human Nature, as
well as the finest China, may have a Flaw
in it; and this, I am afraid, in either Case,
is equally incurable; though, nevertheless,
the Pattern may remain of the highest
Value. 
Upon the whole then, Mr. Allworthy
certainly saw some Imperfections in the Captain; 
but, as this was a very artful Man,
and eternally upon his Guard before him,
these appeared to him no more than Blemishes
in a good Character; which his
Goodness made him overlook, and his Wisdom
prevented him from discovering to the
Captain himself. Very different would have
been his Sentiments, had he discovered the
whole; which, perhaps, would, in Time, have
been the Case, had the Husband and Wife
long continued this Kind of Behaviour to
each other; but this kind Fortune took effectual
Means to prevent, by forcing the
Captain to do that which rendered him
again dear to his Wife, and restored all her
Tenderness and Affection towards him. 




A Receipt to regain the lost Affections of a
Wife, which hath never been known to fail
in the most desperate Cases. 
The Captain was made large Amends
for the unpleasant Minutes which he
passed in the Conversation of his Wife (and
which were as few as he could contrive to
make them) by the pleasant Meditations he
enjoyed when alone. 
These Meditations were entirely employed
on Mr. Allworthy's Fortune; for first, he
exercised much Thought in calculating, as
well as he could, the exact Value of the
whole; which Calculations he often saw
Occasion to alter in his own Favour: And
secondly, and chiefly, he pleased himself with
intended Alterations in the House and Gardens,
and in projecting many other Schemes,
as well for Improvement of the Estate, as of
the Grandeur of the Place. For this Purpose
he applied himself to the Studies of
Architecture and Gardening, and read over
many Books on both these Subjects; for
these Sciences, indeed, employed his whole 

Time, and formed his only Amusement. 
He at last completed a most excellent
Plan; and very sorry we are, that it is
not in our Power to present it to our Reader,
since even the Luxury of the present
Age, I believe, would hardly match it. It
had, indeed, in a superlative Degree, the
two principal Ingredients which serve to recommend
all great and noble Designs of
this Nature: For it required an immoderate
Expence to execute, and a vast Length
of Time to bring it to any Sort of Perfection. 
The former of these, the immense
Wealth of which the Captain supposed
Mr. Allworthy possessed, and which he
thought himself sure of inheriting, promised
very effectually to supply; and the latter, the
Soundness of his own Constitution, and his
Time of Life, which was only what is called
Middle Age, removed all Apprehension of
his not living to accomplish. 
Nothing was wanting to enable him to
enter upon the immediate Execution of this
Plan, but the Death of Mr. Allworthy; in
calculating which he had employed much of
his own Algebra; besides purchasing every
Book extant that treats of the Value of
Lives, Reversions, & c. From all which,
he satisfied himself, that as he had every 

Day a Chance of this happening, so had he
more than an even Chance of its happening
within a few Years. 
But while the Captain was one Day busied
in deep Contemplations of this Kind, one
of the most unlucky, as well as unseasonable
Accidents, happened to him. The utmost
Malice of Fortune could indeed have
contrived nothing so cruel, so mal-a-propos,
so absolutely destructive to all his Schemes. 
In short, not to keep the Reader in long
Suspence, just at the very Instant when his
Heart was exulting in Meditations on
the Happiness which would accrue to him
by Mr. Allworthy's Death, he himself— 
died of an Apoplexy. 
This unfortunately befel the Captain as
he was taking his Evening Walk by himself,
so that no Body was present to lend
him any Assistance, if indeed any Assistance
could have preserved him. He took, therefore,
Measure of that Proportion of Soil,
which was now become adequate to all his
future Purposes, and he lay dead on the
Ground, a great (though not a living) Example
of the Truth of that Observation of
Horace: 


‘Tu secanda marmora
 ‘Locas sub ipsum funus: et sepulchri
‘Immemor, struis domos.
Which Sentiment, I shall thus give to the
English Reader: ‘You provide the noblest
Materials for Building, when a Pick-ax
and a Spade are only necessary; and
build Houses of five hundred by a hundred
Feet, forgetting that of six by two.’ 



A Proof of the Infallibility of the foregoing
Receipt, in the Lamentations of the Widow; 
with other suitable Decorations of
Death, such as Physicians, &c. and an
Epitaph in the true Stile. 
Mr. Allworthy, his Sister, and another
Lady, were assembled at the accustomed
Hour in the Supper Room, where
having waited a considerable Time longer
than usual, Mr. Allworthy first declared he
began to grow uneasy at the Captain's Stay; 
(for he was always most punctual at his
Meals,) and gave Orders that the Bell
should be rung without the Doors, and 

especially towards those Walks which the Captain
was wont to use. 
All these Summons proving ineffectual,
(for the Captain had, by perverse Accident,
betaken himself to a new Walk that Evening)
Mrs. Blifil declared she was seriously
frightned. Upon which the other Lady, who
was one of her most intimate Acquaintance,
and who well knew the true State of her Affections,
endeavoured all she could to pacify
her; telling her—To be sure she could not
help being uneasy; but that she should hope
the best. That, perhaps, the Sweetness of
the Evening had enticed the Captain to go
farther than his usual Walk, or he might
be detained at some Neighbour's. Mrs. Blifil
answered, No; she was sure some Accident
had befallen him; for that he would never
stay out without sending her Word, as he
must know how uneasy it would make her. 
The other Lady, having no other Arguments
to use, betook herself to the Entreaties
usual on such Occasions, and begged
her not to frighten herself, for it might be
of very ill Consequence to her own Health; 
and, filling out a very large Glass of Wine,
advised, and at last prevailed with, her to
drink it. 

Mr. Allworthy now returned into the Parlour; 
for he had been himself in Search after
the Captain. His Countenance sufficiently
shewed the Consternation he was
under, which indeed had a good deal deprived
him of Speech; but as Grief operates
variously on different Minds, so the same
Apprehension which depressed his Voice,
elevated that of Mrs. Blifil. She now began to
bewail herself in very bitter Terms, and Floods
of Tears accompanied her Lamentations,
which the Lady, her Companion, declared
she could not blame; but at the same Time
dissuaded her from indulging; attempting
to moderate the Grief of her Friend, by
philosophical Observations on the many Disappointments
to which human Life is daily
subject, which, she said, was a sufficient
Consideration to fortify our Minds against
any Accidents, how sudden or terrible soever. 
She said, her Brother's Example
ought to teach her Patience, who, though
indeed he could not be supposed as much
concerned as herself, yet was doubtless very
uneasy, though his Resignation to the Divine
Will had restrained his Grief within
due Bounds. 
‘Mention not my Brother,’ said Mrs.
Blifil, ‘I alone am the Object of your Pity. 
What are the Terrors of Friendship to 

what a Wife feels on these Occasions? O
he is lost! Somebody hath murdered him
—I shall never see him more’—Here
a Torrent of Tears had the same Consequence
with what the Suppression had occasioned
to Mr. Allworthy, and she remained
silent. 
At this Interval, a Servant came running
in, out of Breath, and cried out, the Captain
was found; and, before he could proceed
farther, he was followed by two more,
bearing the dead Body between them. 
Here the curious Reader may observe another
Diversity in the Operations of Grief: 
For as Mr. Allworthy had been before silent,
from the same Cause which had made his
Sister vociferous; so did the present Sight,
which drew Tears from the Gentleman, put
an entire Stop to those of the Lady; who
first gave a violent Scream, and presently
after fell into a Fit. 
The Room was soon full of Servants,
some of whom, With the Lady visitant,
were employed in Care of the Wife, and
others, with Mr. Allworthy, assisted in carrying
off the Captain to a warm Bed, where
every Method was tried, in order to restore
him to Life. 

And glad should we be, could we inform
the Reader that both these Bodies had
been attended with equal Success; for those
who undertook the Care of the Lady, succeeded
so well, that after the Fit had continued
a decent Time, she again revived,
to their great Satisfaction; but as to the
Captain, all Experiments of bleeding, chasing,
dropping, &c. proved ineffectual. 
Death, that inexorable Judge, had passed
Sentence on him, and refused to grant him a
Reprieve, though two Doctors who arrived,
and were fee'd at one and the same Instant,
were his Council. 
These two Doctors, whom, to avoid any
malicious Applications, we shall distinguish
by the Names of Dr. Y. and Dr. Z.
having felt his Pulse; to wit, Dr. Y. his
right Arm, and Dr. Z. his left, both agreed
that he was absolutely dead; but as to the
Distemper, or Cause of his Death, they
differed, Dr. Y. holding that he had died
of an Apoplexy, and Dr. Z. of an Epilepsy. 
Hence arose a Dispute between the learned
Men, in which each delivered the Reasons
of their several Opinions. These were of
such equal Force, that they served both to 

confirm either Doctor in his own Sentiments,
and made not the least Impression
on his Adversary. 
To say the Truth, every Physician, almost,
hath his favourite Disease, to which
he ascribes all the Victories obtained over
human Nature. The Gout, the Rheumatism,
the Stone, the Gravel, and the Consumption,
have all their several Patrons in
the Faculty; and none more than the nervous
Fever, or the Fever on the Spirits. 
And here we may account for those Disagreements
in Opinion, concerning the Cause of
a Patient's Death; which sometimes occur
between the most learned of the College; 
and which have greatly surprized
that Part of the World who have been ignorant
of the Fact we have above asserted. 
The Reader may, perhaps, be surprized,
that instead of endeavouring to revive the
Patient, the learned Gentlemen should fall
immediately into a Dispute on the Occasion
of his Death; but in reality, all such Experiments
had been made before their Arrival: 
For the Captain was put into a warm
Bed, had his Veins scarified, his Forehead
chafed, and all Sorts of strong Drops applied
to his Lips and his Nostrils. 

The Physicians, therefore, finding themselves
anticipated in every thing they ordered,
were at a Loss how to employ that Portion
of Time which it is usual and decent to
remain for their Fee, and were therefore
necessitated to find some Subject or other
for Discourse; and what could more naturally
present itself than that before-mentioned? 
Our Doctors were about to take their
Leave, when Mr. Allworthy, having given
over the Captain, and acquiesced in the
divine Will, began to enquire after his
Sister, whom he desired them to visit before
their Departure. 
This Lady was now recovered of her Fit,
and, to use the common Phrase, as well
as could be expected for one in her Condition. 
The Doctors, therefore, all previous
Ceremonies being complied with as
this was a new Patient, attended, according
to Desire, and laid hold on each of her
Hands, as they had before done on those
of the Corpse. 
The Case of the Lady was in the other
Extreme from that of her Husband; for, 

as he was past all the Assistance of Physic,
so, in reality, she required none. 
There is nothing more unjust, than the
vulgar Opinion by which Physicians are
misrepresented, as Friends to Death. On
the contrary, I believe, if the Number of
those who recover by Physic could be opposed
to that of the Martyrs to it, the former
would rather exceed the latter. Nay,
some are so cautious on this Head, that, to
avoid a Possibility of killing the Patient,
they abstain from all Methods of curing,
and prescribe nothing but what can neither
do good nor harm. I have heard some
of these, with great Gravity, deliver it as a
Maxim, That Nature should be left to do
her own Work, while the Physician stands
by, as it were too clap her on the Back,
and encourage her when she doth well. 
So little then did our Doctors delight in
Death, that they discharged the Corpse after
a single Fee; but they were not so disgusted
with their living Patient; concerning
whose Case they immediately agreed,
and fell to prescribing with great Diligence. 
Whether, as the Lady had at first persuaded
her Physicians to believe her ill, they 

had now, in return, persuaded her to believe
herself so, I will not determine; but
she continued a whole Month with all the
Decorations of Sickness. During this Time
she was visited by Physicians, attended by
Nurses, and received constant Messages from
her Acquaintance, to enquire after her Health. 
At length, the decent Time for Sickness
and immoderate Grief being expired, the
Doctors were discharged, and the Lady
began to see Company; being altered only
from what she was before by that Colour of
Sadness in which she had dressed her Person
and Countenance. 
The Captain was now interred, and might,
perhaps, have already made a large Progress
towards Oblivion, had not the Friendship
of Mr. Allworthy taken Care to preserve
his Memory, by the following Epitaph,
which was written by a Man of as
great Genius as Integrity, and one who
perfectly well knew the Captain. 

Here lies,
In Expectation of a joyful Rising,
The Body of
Captain John Blifil.
London
had the Honour of his Birth,
Oxford
of his Education. 
His Parts
were an Honour to his Profession
and to his Country.
His Life to his Religion
and human Nature. 
He was a dutiful Son,
a tender Husband,
an affectionate Father,
a sincere Friend,
a devout Christian,
and a good Man. 
His inconsolable Widow
hath erected this Stone,
The Monument of
His Virtues,
and of Her Affection. 

