


Containing about three Weeks. 



Of Love. 
In our last Book we have been obliged
to deal pretty much with the Passion of
Love; and, in our succeeding Book,
shall be forced to handle this Subject still
more largely. It may not, therefore, in
this Place, be improper to apply ourselves to
the Examination of that modern Doctrine, 

by which certain Philosophers, among many
other wonderful Discoveries, pretend to
have found out, that there is no such Passion
in the human Breast. 
Whether these Philosophers be the same
with that surprizing Sect, who are honourably
mentioned by the late Dr. Swift; as
having, by the mere Force of Genius alone,
without the least Assistance of any Kind of
Learning, or even Reading, discrovered that
profound and invaluable Secret, That there
was no G&wblank;: or whether they are not rather
the same with those who, some Years
since, very much alarmed the World, by
shewing that there were no such things as
Virtue or Goodness really existing in Human
Nature, and who deduced our best Actions
from Pride, I will not here presume
to determine. In reality, I am inclined
to suspect, that all these several Finders of
Truth are the very identical Men, who are
by others called the Finders of Gold. The
Method used in both these Searches after
Truth and after Gold, being, indeed, one
and the same; viz. the searching, rummaging,
and examining into a nasty Place; 
indeed, in the former Instances, into the
nastiest of all Places, A bad Mind. 

But though, in this Particular, and perhaps
in their Success, the Truth-finder, and
the Gold-finder, may very properly be
compared together; yet in Modesty, surely,
there can be no Comparison between the
two; for who ever heard of a Gold-finder
that had the Impudence or Folly to assert,
from the ill Success of his Search, that there
was no such thing as Gold in the World? 
Whereas the Truth-finder, having raked
out that Jakes his own Mind, and being
there capable of tracing no Ray of Divinity,
nor any thing virtuous, or good, or lovely,
or loving, very fairly, honestly, and logically
concludes, that no such things exist in
the whole Creation. 
To avoid, however, all Contention, if
possible, with these Philosophers, if they
will be called so; and to shew our own
Disposition to accommodate Matters peaceably
between us, we shall here make them
some Concessions, which may possibly put
an End to the Dispute. 
First, we will grant that many Minds,
and perhaps those of the Philosophers, are
entirely free from the least Traces of such a
Passion. 

Secondly, That what is commonly called
Love, namely, the Desire of satisfying a
voracious Appetite with a certain Quantity
of delicate white human Flesh, is by no
Means that Passion for which I here contend. 
This is indeed more properly Hunger; and
as no Glutton is ashamed to apply the Word
Love to his Appetite, and to say he LOVES
such and such Dishes; so may the Lover
of this Kind, with equal Propriety say, he
HUNGERS after such and such Women. 
Thirdly, I will grant, which I believe
will be a most acceptable Concession, that
this Love for which I am an Advocate,
though it satisfies itself in a much more delicate
Manner, doth nevertheless seek its
own Satisfaction as much as the grossest of
all our Appetites. 
And, Lastly, That this Love when it
operates towards one of a different Sex, is
very apt, towards its complete Gratification,
to call in the Aid of that Hunger which I
have mentioned above; and which it is so
far from abating, that it heightens all its
Delights to a Degree scarce imaginable by
those who have never been susceptible of any
other Emotions, than what have proceeded
from Appetite alone. 

In return to all these Concessions, I desire
of the Philosophers to grant; that there is in
some (I believe in many) human Breasts,
a kind and benevolent Disposition, which
is gratified by contributing to the Happiness
of others. That in this Gratification
alone, as in Friendship, in parental and
filial Affection, and indeed in general Philanthropy,
there is a great and exquisite Delight. 
That if we will not call such Disposition
Love, we have no Name for it. 
That though the Pleasures arising from such
pure Love may be heightened and sweetened
by the Assistance of amorous Desires,
yet the former can subsist alone, nor are
they destroyed by the Intervention of the
latter. Lastly, That Esteem and Gratitude are
the proper Motives to Love, as Youth and
Beauty are to Desire; and therefore though
such Desire may naturally cease, when Age
or Sickness overtake its Object, yet these
can have no Effect on Love, nor ever
shake or remove from a good Mind, that
Sensation or Passion which hath Gratitude
and Esteem for its Basis. 
To deny the Existence of a Passion of
which we often see manifest Instances,
seems to be very strange and absurd; and 

can indeed proceed only from that Self-Admonition
which we have mentioned above: 
But how unfair is this? Doth the
Man who recognizes in his own Heart no
Traces of Avarice or Ambition, conclude
therefore, that there are no such Passions in
Human Nature? Why will we not modestly
observe the same Rule in judging of the
Good, as well as the Evil of others? Or
why, in any Case, will we, as Shakespear phrases
it, ‘put the World in our own Person?’ 
Predominant Vanity is, I am afraid, too
much concerned here. This is one Instance
of that Adulation which we bestow on our
own Minds, and this almost universally. 
For there is scarce any Man, how much
soever he may despise the Character of a
Flatterer, but will condescend in the meanest
Manner to flatter himself. 
To those, therefore, I apply for the
Truth of the above Observations, whose
own Minds can bear Testimony to what I
have advanced. 
Examine your Heart, my good Reader,
and resolve whether you do believe these
Matters with me. If you do, you may
now proceed to their Exemplisication in the 

following Pages; if you do not, you have,
I assure you, already read more than you
have understood; and it would be wiser to
pursue your Business, or your Pleasures
(such as they are) than to throw away any
more of your Time in reading what you
can neither taste nor comprehend. To
treat of the Effects of Love to you, must
be as absurd as to discourse on Colours to
a Man born blind; since possibly your Idea
of Love may be as absurd as that which we
are told such blind Man once entertained
of the Colour Red: that Colour seemed to
him to be very much like the Sound of a
Trumpet; and Love probably may, in your
Opinion, very greatly resemble a Dish of
Soup, or a Sir-loin of Roast-beef. 



The Character of Mrs. Western. Her great
Learning and Knowledge of the World, and
an Instance of the deep Penetration which
she derived from those Advantages. 
The Reader hath seen Mr. Western,
his Sister and Daughter, with young
Jones, and the Parson; going together to
Mr. Western's House, where the greater 

Part of the Company spent the Evening
with much Joy and Festivity. Sophia was
indeed the only grave Person: For as to
Jones, though Love had now gotten entire
Possession of his Heart, yet the pleasing
Reflection on Mr. Allworthy's Recovery,
and the Presence of his Mistress, joined to
some tender Looks which she now and
then could not refrain from giving him,
so elevated our Heroe, that he joined the
Mirth of the other three, who were perhaps
as good-humoured People as any in the World. 
Sophia retained the same Gravity of
Countenance the next Morning at Breakfast; 
whence she retired likewise earlier
than usual, leaving her Father and Aunt
together. The Squire took no Notice of
this Change in his Daughter's Disposition. 
To say the Truth, though he was somewhat
of a Politician, and had been twice a
Candidate in the Country Interest at an
Election, he was a Man of no great Observation. 
His Sister was a Lady of a different
Turn. She had lived about the
Court, and had seen the World. Hence
she had acquired all that Knowledge which
the said World usually communicates; and
was a perfect Mistress of Manners, Customs,
Ceremonies, and Fashions; nor did her 

Erudition stop here. She had considerably improved
her Mind by Study; she had not only
read all the modern Plays, Operas, Oratorios,
Poems and Romances; in all which she
was a Critic; but had gone thro' Rapin's
History of England, Eachard's Roman History,
and many French Memoires pour servir
a l'Histoire; to these she had added most
of the political Pamphlets and Journals,
published within the last twenty Years. 
From which she had attained a very
competent Skill in Politics, and could discourse
very learnedly on the Affairs of
Europe. She was moreover excellently well
skilled in the Doctrine of Amour, and
knew better than any body who and who
were together: A Knowledge which she the
more easily attained, as her Pursuit of it
was never diverted by any Affairs of her
own; for either she had no Inclinations, or
these  had never been sollicited; which last
is indeed very probable: For her masculine
Person, which was near six Foot high, added
to her Manner and Learning, possibly
prevented the other Sex from regarding
her, notwithstanding her Petticoats, in
the Light of a Woman. However, as she
had considered the Matter scientifically, she
perfectly well knew, though she had never
practised them, all the Arts which fine 

Ladies use when they desire to give Encouragement,
or to conceal Liking, with all
the long Appendage of Smiles, Ogles, Glances,
&c. as they are at present practised in
the Beau-monde. To sum the whole, no
Species of Disguise or Affectation had escaped
her Notice; but as to the plain
simple Workings of honest Nature, as she
had never seen any such, she could know
but little of them. 
By means of this wonderful Sagacity,
Mrs. Western had now, as she thought,
made a Discovery of something in the
Mind of Sophia. The first Hint of this
she took from the Behaviour of the young
Lady in the Field of Battle; and the Suspicion
which she then conceived, was greatly
corroborated by some Observations which
she had made that Evening, and the next
Morning. However, being greatly cautious
to avoid being found in a Mistake, she
carried the Secret a whole Fortnight in her
Bosom, giving only some oblique Hints,
by Simperings, Winks, Nods, and now
and then dropping an obscure Word, which
indeed sufficiently alarmed Sophia, but did
not at all affect her Brother. 

Being at length, however, thoroughly
satisfied of the Truth of her Observation,
she took an Opportunity, one Morning,
when she was alone with her Brother, to
interrupt one of his Whistles in the following
Manner. 
‘Pray, Brother, have you not observed
something very extraordinary in my Niece
lately?’ ‘No, not I,’ answered Western; 
‘Is any thing the Matter with the Girl? 
I think there is,’ replies she, ‘and something
of much Consequence too.’ ‘Why
she doth not complain of any Thing,
cries Western, ‘and she hath had the Small
Pox.’ ‘Brother,’ returned she, ‘Girls are
liable to other Distempers besides the
Small Pox, and sometimes possibly to
much worse.’ Here Western interrupted
her with much Earnestness, and begged her,
if any thing ailed his Daughter, to acquaint
him immediately, adding, ‘she knew he
loved her more than his own Soul, and
that he would send to the World's End
for the best Physician to her.’ ‘Nay, nay,’ 
answered she, smiling, ‘the Distemper is
not so terrible; but I believe, Brother,
you are convinced I know the World,
and I promise you I was never more deceived 

in my Life, if my Niece be not
most desperately in Love.’ ‘How! in
Love,’ cries Western, in a Passion, ‘in
Love without acquainting me! I'll disinherit
her, I'll turn her out of Doors,
stark naked, without a Farthing. Is all
my Kindness vor 'ur, and vondness o'ur
come to this, to fall in Love without asking
me Leave!’ ‘But you will not,’ answered
Mrs. Western, ‘turn this Daughter,
whom you love better than your
own Soul, out of Doors, before you
know whether you shall approve her
Choice. Suppose she should have fixed
on the very Person whom you yourself
would wish, I hope you would not be
angry then.’ ‘No, no,’ cries Western,
that would make a Difference. If she
marries the Man I would ha' her, she
may love whom she pleasses. I shan't
trouble my Head about that.’ ‘That is
spoken,’ answered the Sister, ‘like a sensible
Man, but I believe the very Person
she hath chosen, would be the very Person
you would chuse for her. I will disclaim
all Knowledge of the World if it is
not so; and I believe, Brother, you will
allow I have some.’ ‘Why lookee, Sister,’ 
said Western, ‘I do believe you have as
much as any Woman; and to be sure 

those are Women's Matters. You know
I don't love to hear you talk about Politics,
they belong to us, and Petticoats
should not meddle: But come, Who is the
Man?’ ‘Marry!’ said she, ‘you may find
him out yourself, if you please. You who
are so great a Politician can be at no great
Loss. The Judgment which can penetrate
into the Cabinets of Princes, and discover
the secret Springs which move the great State
Wheels in all the political Machines of
Europe, must surely, with very little Difficulty
find out what passes in the rude
uninformed Mind of a Girl.’ ‘Sister,’ cries
the Squire, ‘I have often warned you
not to talk the Court Gibberish to me. 
I tell you, I don't understand the Lingo; 
but I can read a Journal, or the London
Evening-Post. Perhaps indeed, there may
be now and tan a Verse which I can't
make much of, because half the Letters
are left out; yet I know very well what
is meant by that, and that our Affairs
don't go so well as they should do, because
of Bribery and Corruption. I pity
your Country Ignorance from my Heart,’ 
cries the Lady, ‘Do you?’ answered
Western, ‘and I pity your Town Learning,
I had rather be any Thing than a Courtier,
and a Presbyterian, and a Hanoverian too, as 

some People, I believe, are.’ ‘If you
mean me,’ answered she, ‘you know I
am a Woman, Brother; and it signifies
nothing what I am. Besides—‘I do
know you are a Woman,’ cries the
Squire, ‘and its well for thee, that at
one; if hadst been a Man, I promise
thee I had lent thee a Flick long
ago.’ ‘Ay there,’ said she, ‘in that Flick
lies all your fancied Superiority. Your
Bodies, and not your Brains, are stronger
than ours. Believe me, it is well for
you that you are able to beat us, or such
is the Superiority of our Understanding,
we should make all of you what the brave,
and wise, and witty, and polite are already,
—our Slaves.’ ‘I am glad I know your
Mind,’ answered the Squire, ‘but we'll
talk more of this Matter another Time. 
At present, do tell me what Man it is
you mean about my Daughter.’ ‘Hold a
Moment,’ said she, ‘while I digest that
sovereign Contempt I have for your Sex; 
or else I ought to be too angry with
you. There—I have made a Shift
to gulp it down. And now, good politic
Sir, what think you of Mr. Blifil? 
Did she not faint away on seeing him lie
breathless on the Ground? Did she not,
after he was recovered, turn pale again 

the Moment we came up to that Part of
the Field where he stood? And pray what
else should be the Occasion of all her Melancholy
that Night at Supper, the next
Morning, and indeed ever since?’ ‘'Fore
George!’ cries the Squire, ‘now you mind
me on't, I remember it all. It is certainly
so, and I am glad on't with all my
Heart. I knew Sophy was a good Girl,
and would not fall in Love to make me
angry. I was never more rejoiced in my
Life: For nothing can lie so handy together
as our two Estates. I had this
Matter in my Head some Time ago; for
certainly the two Estates are in a Manner
joined together in Matrimony already,
and it would be a thousand Pities
to part them. It is true indeed, there be
larger Estates in the Kingdom, but not
in this County, and I had rather bate
something, than marry my Daughter among
Strangers and Foreigners. Besides
most o' zuch great Estates be in the
Hands of Lords, and I heate the very
Name of themmun. Well but, Sister, what
would you advise me to do: For I tell
you Women know these Matters better
than we do?’ ‘O, your humble Servant,
Sir,’ answered the Lady, ‘we are obliged
to you for allowing us a Capacity 

in any Thing. Since you are pleased
then, most politic Sir, to ask my Advice,
I think you may propose the Match to
Allworthy yourself. There is no Indecorum
in the Proposal's coming from the
Parent of either Side. King Alcinous, in
Mr. Pope's Odyssey, offers his Daughter
to Ulysses. I need not caution so politic a
Person not to say that your Daughter is in
Love; that would indeed be against all
Rules.’ ‘Well,’ said the Squire, ‘I will
propose it; but I shall certainly, lend un a
a Flick, if he should refuse me. Fear not,’ 
cries Mrs. Western, ‘the Match is too advantageous
to be refused.’ ‘I don't know
that,’ answered the Squire, ‘Allworthy is
a queer B&wblank;ch, and Money hath no Effect
o'un.’ ‘Brother,’ said the Lady, ‘your Politics
astonish me. Are you really to be imposed
on by Professions? Do you think
Mr. Allworthy hath more Contempt
for Money than other Men, because he
professes more. Such Credulity would better
become one of us weak Women, than
that wise Sex which Heaven hath formed
for Politicians. Indeed, Brother, you
would make a fine Plenipo to negotiate
with the French. They would soon persuade
you, that they take Towns out of
mere defensive Principles.’ ‘Sister,’ answered 

the Squire, with much Scorn,
‘Let your Friends at Court answer for the
Towns taken; as you are a Woman, I
shall lay no Blame upon you: For I suppose
they are wiser than to trust Women
with Secrets.’ He accompanied this with
so sarcastical a Laugh, that Mrs. Western
could bear no longer. She had been all
this Time fretted in a tender Part (for she
was indeed very deeply skilled in these
Matters, and very violent in them) and
therefore burst forth in a Rage, declared
her Brother to be both a Clown and a
Blockhead, and that she would stay no longer
in his House. 
The Squire, tho', perhaps, he had never
read Machiavel, was, however, in many
Points, a perfect Politician. He strongly
held all those wise Tenets, which are so
well inculcated in that Politico-Peripatetic
School of Exchange-Alley. He knew the
just Value and only Use of Money, viz. to
lay it up. He was likewise well skilled
in the exact Value of Reversions, Expectations,
&c. and had often considered the
Amount of his Sister's Fortune, and the
Chance which he or his Posterity had of
inheriting it. This he was infinitely too
wise to sacrifice to a trifling Resentment. 

When he found, therefore, he had carried
Matters too far, he began to think of reconciling
them; which was no very difficult
Task, as the Lady had great Affection
for her Brother, and still greater for her
Niece; and tho' too susceptible of an Affront
offered to her Skill in Politics, on
which she much valued herself, was a Woman
of a very extraordinary good and
sweet Disposition. 
Having first, therefore, laid violent Hands
on the Horses, for whose Escape from the
Stable no Place but the Window was left open; 
he next applied himself to his Sister, softened
and soothed her, by unsaying all he had
said, and by Assertions directly contrary
to those which had incensed her. Lastly,
he summoned the Eloquence of Sophia to
his Assistance, who, besides a most graceful
and winning Address, had the Advantage
of being heard with great Favour and
Partiality by her Aunt. 
The Result of the whole was a kind
Smile from Mrs. Western, who said, ‘Brother,
you are absolutely a perfect Croat; 
but as those have their Use in the Army
of the Empress Queen, so you likewise
have some good in you. I will therefore 

once more sign a Treaty of Peace with
you, and see that you do not infringe it
on your Side; at least, as you are so excellent
a Politician, I may expect you
will keep your Leagues like the French,
till your Interest calls upon you to break
them.’ 



Containing two Defiances to the Critics. 
The Squire having settled Matters
with his Sister, as we have seen in
the last Chapter, was so greatly impatient
to communicate the Proposal to Allworthy,
that Mrs. Western had the utmost Difficulty
to prevent him from visiting that Gentleman
in his Sickness, for this Purpose. 
Mr. Allworthy had been engaged to dine
with Mr. Western at the Time when he
was taken ill. He was, therefore, no sooner
discharged out of the Custody of Physic, but
he thought (as was usual with him on all Occasions,
both the highest and the lowest) of
fulfilling his Engagement. 

In the Interval between the Time of the
Dialogue in the last Chapter, and this Day
of public Entertainment, Sophia had, from
certain obscure Hints thrown out by her
Aunt, collected some Apprehension that
the sagacious Lady suspected her Passion
for Jones. She now resolved to take this
Opportunity of wiping out all such Suspicion,
and for that Purpose to put an entire
Constraint on her Behaviour. 
First, she endeavoured to conceal a throbing
melancholy Heart with the utmost
Sprightliness in her Countenance, and the
highest Gayety in her Manner. Secondly,
she addressed her whole Discourse to Mr.
Blifil, and took not the least Notice of poor
Jones the whole Day. 
The Squire was so delighted with this
Conduct of his Daughter, that he scarce
eat any Dinner, and spent almost his whole
Time in watching Opportunities of conveying
Signs of his Approbation by Winks
and Nods to his Sister; who was not at
first altogether so pleased with what she saw
as was her Brother. 
In short, Sophia so greatly overacted her
Part, that her Aunt was at first staggered, 

and began to suspect some Affectation in
her Niece; but as she was herself a Woman
of Great Art, so she soon attributed
this to extreme Art in Sophia. She remembered
the many Hints she had given
her Niece concerning her being in Love,
and imagined the young Lady had taken
this Way to rally her out of her Opinion,
by an overacted Civility; a Notion that was
greatly corroborated by the excessive Gaiety
with which the whole was accompanied. We
cannot here avoid remarking that this Conjecture
would have been better founded,
had Sophia lived ten Years in the Air of
Grosvenor-square, where young Ladies do
learn a wonderful Knack of rallying and
playing with that Passion, which is a mighty
serious Thing in Woods and Groves a hundred
Miles distant from London. 
To say the Truth, in discovering the
Deceit of others, it matters much that our
own Art be wound up, if I may use the Expression,
in the same Key with theirs: For
very artful Men sometimes miscarry by
fancying others wiser, or in other Words,
greater Knaves than they really are. As
this Observation is pretty deep, I will illustrate
it by the following short Story. 
Three Countrymen were pursuing a Wiltshire 

Thief through Brentford. The simplest
of them seeing the Wiltshire House written
under a Sign, advised his Companions to
enter it, for there most probably they would
find their Countryman. The second, who
was wiser, laughed at this Simplicity; but
the third, who was wiser still, answered,
‘Let us go in, however, for he may think
we should not suspect him of going amongst
his own Countrymen.’ They
accordingly went in and searched the House,
and by that Means missed overtaking the
Thief, who was, at that Time, but a little
ways before them; and who, as they all
knew, but had never once reflected, could
not read. 
The Reader will pardon a Digression in
which so invaluable a Secret is communicated,
since every Gamester will agree how necessary
it is to know exactly the Play of
another, in order to countermine him. This
will, moreover, afford a Reason why the
wiser Man, as is often seen, is the Bubble
of the weaker, and why many simple and innocent
Characters are so generally misunderstood
and misrepresented; but what is most
material, this will account for the Deceit
which Sophia put on her politic Aunt. 

Dinner being ended, and the Company
retired into the Garden, Mr. Western, who
was thoroughly convinced of the Certainty
of what his Sister had told him, took Mr.
Allworthy aside, and very bluntly proposed
a Match between Sophia and young Mr.
Blifil. 
Mr. Allworthy was not one of those Men,
whose Hearts flutter at any unexpected and
sudden Tidings of worldly Profit. His
Mind was, indeed, tempered with that
Philosophy which becomes a Man and a
Christian. He affected no absolute Superiority
to all Pleasure and Pain, to all Joy and Grief; 
but was not at the same time to be discomposed
and ruffled by every accidental Blast; 
by every Smile or Frown of Fortune. He
received, therefore, Mr. Western's Proposal
without any visible Emotion, or without
any Alteration of Countenance. He said,
the Alliance was such as he sincerely wished; 
then launched forth into a very just Encomium
on the young Lady's Merit; acknowledged
the Offer to be advantageous
in Point of Fortune; and after thanking
Mr. Western for the good Opinion he had
profess'd of his Nephew, concluded, that
if the young People liked each other, he 

should be very desirous to complete the
Affair. 
Western was a little disappointed at Mr.
Allworthy's Answer; which was not so
warm as he expected. He treated the Doubt
whether the young People might like one
another with great Contempt; saying,
‘That Parents were the best Judges of proper
Matches for their Children; that, for
his Part, he should insist on the most resigned
Obedience from his Daughter; and
if any young Fellow could refuse such a
Bedfellow, he was his humble Servant,
and hoped there was no Harm done.’ 
Allworthy endeavoured to soften this Resentment
by many Elogiums on Sophia; 
declaring, he had no doubt but that Mr.
Blifil would very gladly receive the Offer; 
but all was ineffectual, he could obtain no
other Answer from the Squire but—‘I say
no more—I humbly hope there's no Harm
done—that's all.’ Which Words he repeated,
at least, a hundred Times before
they parted. 
Allworthy was too well acquainted with
his Neighbour to be offended at this Behaviour; 
and tho' he was so averse to the 

Rigour which some Parents exercise on their
Children in the Article of Marriage, that
he had resolved never to force his Nephew's
Inclinations, he was nevertheless much
pleased with the Prospect of this Union: 
For the whole Country resounded the Praises
of Sophia, and he had himself greatly admired
the uncommon Endowments of both
her Mind and Person. To which, I believe
we may add, the Consideration of her vast
Fortune, which, tho' he was too sober to
be intoxicated with, he was too sensible to
despise. 
And here, in Defiance of all the barking
Critics in the World, I must and will introduce
a Digression concerning true Wisdom,
of which Mr. Allworthy was in Reality
as great a Pattern as he was of Goodness. 
True Wisdom then, notwithstanding all
which Mr. Hogarth's poor Poet may have
writ against Riches, and in Spite of all
which any rich, well fed Divine may have
preached against Pleasure, consists not in
the Contempt of either of these. A Man
may have as much Wisdom in the Possession
of an affluent Fortune, as any Beggar in the
Streets; or may enjoy a handsome Wife or a 

hearty Friend, and still remain as wife as
any sour Popish Recluse, who buries all his
social Faculties, and starves his Belly while
he well lashes his Back. 
To say Truth, the wisest Man is the likeliest
to possess all worldly Blessings in an
eminent Degree: For as that Moderation
which Wisdom prescribes is the surest Way
to useful Wealth; so can it alone qualify us
to taste many Pleasures. The wise Man
gratifies every Appetite and every Passion,
while the Fool sacrifices all the rest to pall
and satiate one. 
It may be objected, that very wise Men
have been notoriously avaricious. I answer,
not in that Instance. It may likewise be
said, that the wisest Men have been in their
Youth, immoderately fond of Pleasure. I
answer, they were not wise then. 
Wisdom, in short, whose Lessons have
been represented as so hard to learn by
those who never were at her School, teaches
us only to extend a simple Maxim universally
known and followed even in the lowest
Life, a little farther than that Life carries
it. And this is not to buy at too dear
a Price. 

Now, whoever takes this Maxim abroad
with him into the grand Market of the
World, and constantly applies it to Honours,
to Riches, to Pleasures, and to every
other Commodity which that Market
affords, is, I will venture to affirm, a wise
Man; and must be so acknowledged in
the worldly Sense of the Word: For he
makes the best of Bargains, since in Reality
he purchases every Thing at the Price
only of a little Trouble, and carries home all
the good Things I have mentioned, while
he keeps his Health, his Innocence, and his
Reputation, the common Prices which are
paid for them by others, entire and to himself. 
From this Moderation, likewise, he
learns two other Lessons, which complete
his Character. First, never to be intoxicated
when he hath made the best Bargain,
nor dejected when the Market is empty,
or when its Commodities are too dear for
his Purchase. 
But I must remember on what Subject I
am writing, and not trespass too far on the
Patience of a good-natured Critic. Here
therefore I put an End to the Chapter. 




Containing sundry curious Matters. 
As soon as Mr. Allworthy returned home,
he took Mr. Blifil apart, and after
some Preface, communicated to him the
Proposal which had been made by Mr.
Western, and, at the same Time, informed
him how agreeable this Match would be to
himself. 
The Charms of Sophia had not made
the least Impression on Blifil; not that his
Heart was pre-engaged; neither was he totally
insensible of Beauty, or had any Aversion
to Women; but his Appetites were, by
Nature, so moderate, that he was easily
able by Philosophy or by Study, or by
some other Method, to subdue them; and as
to that Passion which we have treated of in
the first Chapter of this Book, he had not
the least Tincture of it in his whole Composition. 
But tho' he was so entirely free from that
mixed Passion, of which we there treated,
and of which the Virtues and Beauty of 

Sophia formed so notable an Object; yet
was he altogether as well furnished with
some other Passions, that promised themselves
very full Gratification in the young Lady's
Fortune. Such were Avarice and Ambition,
which divided the Dominion of his
Mind between them. He had more than
once considered the Possession of this Fortune
as a very desirable Thing, and had
entertained some distant Views concerning
it: But his own Youth and that of the
young Lady, and indeed principally a Reflection
that Mr. Western might marry again,
and have more Children, had restrained
him from too hasty or eager a Pursuit. 
This last and most material Objection
was now in great Measure removed, as the
Proposal came from Mr. Western himself. 
Blifil, therefore, after a very short Hesitation,
answered Mr. Allworthy, that Matrimony
was a Subject on which he had not
yet thought: But that he was so sensible of
his friendly and fatherly Care, that he
should in all Things submit himself to his
Pleasure. 
Allworthy was naturally a Man of Spirit,
and his present Gravity arose from true 

Wisdom and Philosophy, not from any
original Phlegm in his Disposition: For he
had possessed much Fire in his Youth, and
had married a beautiful Woman for Love. 
He was not, therefore, greatly pleased with
this cold Answer of his Nephew; nor could
he help launching forth into the Praises of
Sophia, and expressing some Wonder that
the Heart of a young Man could be impregnable
to the force of such Charms, unless
it was guarded by some prior Affection. 
Blifil assured him he had no such Guard; 
and then proceeded to discourse so wisely
and religiously on Love and Marriage,
that he would have stopt the Mouth of a
Parent much less devoutly inclined than
was his Uncle. In the End, the good Man
was satisfied, that his Nephew, far from
having any Objections to Sophia, had that
Esteem for her, which in sober and virtuous
Minds is the sure Foundation of Friendship
and Love. And as he doubted not
but the Lover would, in a little Time, become
altogether as agreeable to his Mistress,
he foresaw great Happiness arising to all
Parties by so proper and desirable a Union. 
With Mr. Blifil's Consent, therefore, he
wrote the next Morning to Mr. Western, 

acquainting him that his Nephew had very
thankfully and gladly received the Proposal,
and would be ready to wait on the
young Lady, whenever she should be pleased
to accept his Visit. 
Western was much pleased with this Letter,
and immediately returned an Answer; in
which, without having mentioned a Word to
his Daughter, he appointed that very Afternoon
for opening the Scene of Courtship. 
As soon as he had dispatched this Messenger,
he went in Quest of his Sister, whom
he found reading and expounding the
Gazette to Parson Supple. To this Exposition
he was obliged to attend near a Quarter
of an Hour, tho' with great Violence
to his natural Impetuosity, before he was
suffered to speak. At length, however, he
found an Opportunity of acquainting the
Lady, that he had Business of great Consequence
to impart to her; to which she
answered, ‘Brother, I am entirely at your
Service. Things look so well in the
North that I was never in a better Humour.’ 
The Parson then withdrawing, Western
acquainted her with all which had passed, 

and desired her to communicate the Affair
to Sophia, which she readily and chearfully
undertook; tho' perhaps her Brother was
a little obliged to that agreeable Northern
Aspect which had so delighted her, that he
heard no Comment on his Proceedings:
for they were certainly somewhat too hasty
and violent. 



In which is related what passed between
Sophia and her Aunt. 
Sophia was in her Chamber reading,
when her Aunt came in. The Moment
she saw Mrs. Western, she shut the
Book with so much Eagerness, that the
good Lady could not forbear asking her,
What Book that was which she seemed so
much afraid of shewing. ‘Upon my Word,
Madam,’ answered Sophia, ‘it is a Book
which I am neither ashamed nor afraid to
own I have read. It is the Production of
a young Lady of Fashion, whose good
Understanding, I think, doth Honour to
her Sex, and whose good Heart is an Honour
to Human Nature.’ Mrs. Western
then took up the Book, and immediately after 

threw it down, saying—‘Yes, the Author
is of a very good Family; but she is not
much among People one knows. I have
never read it; for the best Judges say,
there is not much in it.’ ‘I dare not,
Madam, set up my own Opinion,’ says
Sophia, ‘against the best Judges, but there
appears to me a great deal of human Nature
it; and in many Parts, so much true
Tenderness and Delicacy, that it hath cost
me many a Tear.’ ‘Ay, and do you
love to cry then?’ says the Aunt. ‘I love
a tender Sensation,’ answered the Niece,
and would pay the Price of a Tear for it
at any Time.’ ‘Well, but shew me,’ 
said the Aunt, ‘what you was reading
when I came in; there was something
very tender in that, I believe, and very
loving too.’ You blush, my dear Sophia. 
Ah! Child, you should read Books, which
would teach you a little Hypocrisy, which
would instruct you how to hide your
Thoughts a little better.’ ‘I hope, Madam,’ 
answered Sophia, ‘I have no
Thoughts which I ought to be ashamed
of discovering.’ ‘Ashamed! no,’ cries
the Aunt, ‘I don't think you have any
Thoughts which you ought to be ashamed
of, and yet, Child, you blushed just now
when I mentioned the Word Loving. 

Dear Sophy, be assured you have not one
Thought which I am not well acquainted
with; as well, Child, as the French are
with our Motions, long before we put
them in Execution. Did you think,
Child, because you have been able to impose
upon your Father, that you could
impose upon me? Do you imagine I did
not know the Reason of your over-acting
all that Friendship for Mr. Blifil yesterday? 
I have seen a little too much of the
World, to be so deceived. Nay, nay,
do not blush again. I tell you it is a
Passion you need not be ashamed of. —It
is a Passion I myself approve, and have
already brought your Father into the Approbation
of. Indeed, I solely consider
your Inclination; for I would always
have that gratified, if possible, though
one may sacrifice higher Prospects. Come,
I have News which will delight your very
Soul. Make me your Confident, and I
will undertake you shall be happy to the
very Extent of your Wishes.’ ‘La,
Madam,’ says Sophia, looking more
foolishly than ever she did in her Life, ‘I
know not what to say—Why, Madam,
should you suspect?’ —‘Nay, no Dishonesty,’ 
returned Mrs. Western. ‘Consider,
you are speaking to one of your own Sex, 

to an Aunt, and I hope you are convinced
you speak to a Friend. Consider,
you are only revealing to me what I know
already, and what I plainly saw yesterday
through that most artful of all Disguises,
which you had put on, and which must
have deceived any one who had not perfectly
known the World. Lastly, consider
it is a Passion which I highly approve.’ 
‘La, Madam,’ says Sophia, ‘you come
upon one so unawares, and on a sudden. 
To be sure, Madam, I am not blind— 
and certainly, if it be a Fault to see all
human Perfections assembled together— 
But is it possible my Father and you, Madam,
can see with my Eyes? I tell you,’ 
answered the Aunt, ‘we do entirely approve; 
and this very Afternoon your Father
hath appointed for you to receive your
Lover.’ ‘My Father, this Afternoon!’ 
cries Sophia, with the Blood starting from
her Face.’ —‘Yes, Child,’ said the Aunt,
‘this Afternoon. You know the Impetuosity
of my Brother's Temper. I acquainted
him with the Passion which I
first discovered in you that Evening when
you fainted away in the Field. I saw it
in your Fainting. I saw it immediately
upon your Recovery. I saw it that Evening
at Supper, and the next Morning at 

Breakfast: (you know, Child, I have seen
the World). Well, I no sooner acquainted
my Brother; but he immediately
wanted to propose it to Allworthy. He
proposed it Yesterday, Allworthy consented,
(as to be sure he must with
Joy) and this Afternoon, I tell you,
you are to put on all your best Airs.’ 
‘This Afternoon!’ cries Sophia. ‘Dear
Aunt, you frighten me out of my Senses.’ 
‘O, my Dear,’ said the Aunt, ‘you will
soon come to yourself again; for he is a
charming young Fellow, that's the Truth
on't.’ ‘Nay, I will own,’ says Sophia,
I know none with such Perfections. So
brave, and yet so gentle; so witty, yet
so inoffensive; so humane, so civil, so
genteel, so handsome! What signifies his
being base born, when compared with
such Qualifications as these?’ ‘Base born!
what do you mean,’ said the Aunt,
Mr. Blifil base born!’ Sophia turned instantly
pale at this Name, and faintly repeated
it. Upon which the Aunt cried,
‘Mr. Blifil, ay Mr. Blifil, of whom else
have we been talking?’ ‘Good Heavens,’ 
answered Sophia, ready to sink,
of Mr. Jones, I thought; I am sure I
know no other who deserves—’ ‘I
protest,’ cries the Aunt, ‘you frighten
me in your Turn. Is it Mr. Jones, and 

not Mr. Blifil, who is the Object of your
Affection?’ ‘Mr. Blifil!’ repeated Sophia. 
‘Sure it is impossible you can be in
earnest; if you are, I am the most miserable
Woman alive.’ Mrs. Western now
stood a few Moments silent, while Sparks
of fiery Rage flashed from her Eyes. At
length, collecting all her Force of Voice,
she thundered forth in the following articulate Sounds: 
‘And is it possible you can think of disgracing
your Family by allying yourself
to a Bastard? Can the Blood of the
Westerns submit to such Contamination! 
If you have not Sense sufficient to restrain
such monstrous Inclinations, I thought
the Pride of our Family would have prevented
you from giving the least Encouragement
to so base an Affection; much
less did I imagine you would ever have
had the Assurance to own it to my Face.’ 
‘Madam,’ answered Sophia, trembling,
‘what l have said you have extorted from
me. I do not remember to have ever
mentioned the Name of Mr. Jones, with
Approbation, to any one before; nor
should I now, had I not conceived he had
had your Approbation. Whatever were 

my Thoughts of that poor unhappy
young Man, I intended to have carried
them with me to my Grave—To that
Grave where now, I find, I am only to
seek Repose.’ —Here she sunk down in
her Chair, drowned in her Tears, and, in
all the moving Silence of unutterable Grief,
presented a Spectacle which must have affected
almost the hardest Heart. 
All this tender Sorrow, however, raised
no Compassion in her Aunt. On the contrary,
she now fell into the most violent
Rage—‘And I would rather,’ she cried,
in a most vehement Voice, ‘follow you
to your Grave, than I would see you
disgrace yourself and your Family by
such a Match. O Heavens! could I
have ever suspected that I should live to
hear a Niece of mine declare a Passion for
such a Fellow? You are the first—yes,
Miss Western, you are the first of your
Name who ever entertained so groveling
a Thought. A Family so noted for the
Prudence of its Women’—Here she
run on a full Quarter of an Hour, till
having exhausted her Breath rather than
her Rage, she concluded with threatening
to go immediately and acquaint her Brother. 

Sophia then threw herself at her Feet, and
laying hold of her Hands, ‘begged her,
with Tears, to conceal what she had
drawn from her; urging the Violence of
her Father's Temper, and protesting that
no Inclinations of hers should ever prevail
with her to do any thing which might
offend him.’ 
Mrs. Western stood a Moment looking at
her, and then having recollected herself,
said, that ‘on one Consideration only she
would keep the Secret from her Brother; 
and this was, that Sophia should promise
to entertain Mr. Blifil that very Afternoon
as her Lover, and to regard him as the
Person who was to be her Husband.’ 
Poor Sophia was too much in her Aunt's
Power to deny her any thing positively; 
she was obliged to promise that she would
see Mr. Blifil, and be as civil to him as possible; 
but begged her Aunt that the Match
might not be hurried on. She said, ‘Mr.
Blifil was by no means agreeable to her,
and she hoped her Father would be prevailed
on not to make her the most
wretched of Women.’ 

Mrs. Western assured her, ‘that the Match
was entirely agreed upon, and that nothing
could or should prevent it.’ ‘I must
own,’ said she, ‘I looked on it as on a
Matter of Indifference; nay, perhaps, had
some Scruples about it before, which were
actually got over by my thinking it highly
agreeable to your own Inclinations; 
but now I regard it as the most eligible
Thing in the World; nor shall there be,
if I can prevent it, a Moment of Time
lost on the Occasion.’ 
Sophia replied, ‘Delay at least, Madam,
I may expect from both your Goodness
and my Father's. Surely you will
give me Time to endeavour to get the
better of so strong a Disinclination as I
have at present to this Person.’ 
The Aunt answered, ‘She knew too
much of the World to be so deceived; 
that as she was sensible another Man had
her Affections, she should persuade Mr.
Western to hasten the Match as much as
possible. It would be bad Politics indeed,
added she, to protract a Siege when
the Enemy's Army is at Hand, and in
Danger of relieving it. No, no, Sophy, 

said she, as I am convinced you have a
violent Passion, which you can never satisfy
with Honour, I will do all I can
to put your Honour out of the Care of
your Family: For when you are married
those Matters will belong only to the
Consideration of your Husband. I hope,
Child, you will always have Prudence
enough to act as becomes you; but if you
should not, Marriage hath saved many a
Woman from Ruin.’ 
Sophia well understood what her Aunt
meant; but did not think proper to make
her an Answer. However, she took a Resolution
to see Mr. Blifil, and to behave to
him as civilly as she could: For on that
Condition only she obtained a Promise from
her Aunt to keep secret the Liking which
her ill Fortune, rather than any Scheme of
Mrs. Western, had unhappily drawn from
her. 




Containing a Dialogue between Sophia and
Mrs. Honour, which may a little relieve
those tender Affections which the foregoing
Scene may have raised in the Mind of a
good-natur'd Reader. 
Mrs. Western having obtained that
Promise from her Niece which we
have seen in the last Chapter, withdrew,
and presently after arrived Mrs. Honour. 
She was at Work in neighbouring Apartment,
and had been summoned to the
Key-hole by some Vociferation in the
preceding Dialogue, where she had continued
during the remaining Part of it. At
her Entry into the Room, she found Sophia
standing motionless, with the Tears trickling
from her Eyes. Upon which she immediately
ordered a proper Quantity of
Tears into her Eyes, and then began,
‘O Gemini, my dear Lady, what is the
Matter? Nothing,’ cries Sophia. ‘Nothing!
O dear Madam,’ answers Mrs.
Honour, ‘you must not tell me that,
when your Ladyship is in this Taking,
and when there hath been such a Preamble 

between your Ladyship and Madam
Western.’ ‘Don't teaze me,’ cries Sophia,
I tell you nothing is the Matter. —Good
Heavens! Why was I born! —Nay,
Madam,’ says Mrs. Honour, ‘you shall
never persuade me, that your La'ship
can lament yourself so for nothing. To
be sure, I am but a Servant; but to be
sure I have been always faithful to your
Ladyship, and to be sure I would serve your
La'ship with my Life.’ ‘My dear Honour,’ 
says Sophia ‘'tis not in thy Power to be
of any Service to me. I am irretrievably
undone.’ ‘Heaven forbid,’ answered the
Waiting woman; ‘but if I can't be of any
Service to you, pray tell me, Madam,
it will be some Comfort to me to know; 
Pray, dear Ma'am, tell me what's the
Matter.’ ‘My Father,’ cries Sophia, ‘is going
to marry me to a Man I both despise
and hate.’ ‘O, dear Ma'am,’ answered
the other, ‘Who is this wicked Man?
for to be sure he is very bad, or your
La'ship would not despise him.’ ‘His
Name is Poison to my Tongue,’ replied
Sophia, ‘thou wilt know it too soon.’ 
Indeed, to confess the Truth, she knew it
already, and therefore was not very inquisitive
as to that Point. She then proceeded
thus: ‘I don't pretend to give your 

La'ship Advice, whereof your La'ship
knows much better than I can pretend to,
being but a Servant; but, i-fackins! no
Father in England should marry me against
my Consent. And to be sure, the
Squire is so good, that if he did but
know your La'ship despises and hates the
young Man, to be sure he would not desire
you to marry him. And if your
La'ship would but give me Leave to tell
my Master so—To be sure, it would be
more properer to come from your own
Mouth; but as your La'ship doth not
care to foul your Tongue with his nasty
Name.’ ‘You are mistaken, Honour,’ says
Sophia, ‘my Father was determined before
he ever thought fit to mention it to me.’ 
‘More Shame for him,’ cries Honour,
‘you are to go to Bed to him, and not
Master. And thof a Man may be a very
proper Man, yet every Woman mayn't
think him handsome alike. I am sure my
Master would never act in this Manner of
his own Head. I wish some People would
trouble themselves only with what belongs
to them; they would not, I believe, like
to be served so, if it was their own Case: 
For tho' I am a Maid, I can easily believe
as how all Men are not equally
agreeable. And what signifies your
La'ship having so great a Fortune, if you 

can't please yourself with the Man you think
most handsomest? Well, I say nothing,
but to be sure it is Pity some Folks had
not been better born; nay, as for that
Matter, I should not mind it my self: 
But then there is not so much Money,
and what of that, your La'ship hath Money
enough for both; and where can
your La'ship bestow your Fortune better? 
For to be sure every one must allow, that
he is the most handsomest, charmingest,
finest, tallest, properest Man in the World.’ 
‘What do you mean by running on in
this Manner to me?’ cries Sophia, with a
very grave Countenance. ‘Have I ever
given any Encouragement for these Liberties? 
Nay, Ma'am, I ask Pardon, I
meant no Harm,’ answered she, ‘but to
be sure the poor Gentleman hath run in
my Head ever since I saw him this Morning. 
—To be sure, if your Ladyship had
but seen him just now, you must
have pitied him. Poor Gentleman! I
wishes some Misfortune hath not happened
to him: For he hath been walking about
with his Arms a-cross, and looking
so melancholy all this Morning; I vow
and protest it made me almost cry to see
him.’ ‘To see whom?’ says Sophia. ‘Poor
Mr. Jones,’ answered Honour. ‘See him! 

Why, where did you see him?’ cries Sophia. ‘By the Canal, Ma'am,’ says Honour. 
‘There he hath been walking all this
Morning, and at last there he laid himself
down; I believe he lies there still. 
To be sure, if it had not been for my
Modesty, being a Maid as I am, I should
have gone and spoke to him. Do, Ma'am,
let me go and see, only for a Fancy, whether
he is there still.’ ‘Pugh!’ says Sophia,
There! no, no, what should he do there? 
He is gone before this Time to be sure. 
Besides, why—what—why should you
go to see? —Besides, I want you for something
else. Go, fetch me my Hat and
Gloves. I shall walk with my Aunt
in the Grove before Dinner.’ Honour
did immediately as she was bid, and Sophia
put her Hat on; when looking in the
Glass, she fancied the Ribbon with which
her Hat was tied, did not become her, and
so sent her Maid back again for a Ribbon
of a different Colour; and then giving Mrs.
Honour repeated Charges not to leave her
Work on any Account, as she said it was
in violent Haste, and must be finished
that very Day, she muttered something
more about going to the Grove, and then
sallied out the contrary Way, and walked 

as fast as her tender trembling Limbs could
carry her, directly towards the Canal. 
Jones had been there, as Mrs. Honour had
told her: He had indeed spent two Hours
there that Morning in melancholy Contemplation
on his Sophia, and had gone out from
the Garden at one Door, the Moment she
entered it at another. So that those unlucky
Minutes which had been spent in
changing the Ribbons, had prevented the
Lovers from Meeting at this Time. A
most unfortunate Accident, from which my
fair Readers will not fail to draw a very
wholesome Lesson. And here I strictly
forbid all Male Critics to intermeddle with a
Circumstance, which I have recounted only
for the Sake of the Ladies, and upon
which they only are at Liberty to comment. 




A Picture of formal Courtship in Miniature,
as it always ought to be drawn, and a
Scene of a tenderer Kind, painted at full
Length. 
It was well remarked by one, (and perhaps
by more) that Misfortunes do not
come single. This wise Maxim was now
verified by Sophia, who was not only disappointed
of seeing the Man she loved; 
but had the Vexation of being obliged to
dress herself out, in order to receive a Visit
from the Man she hated. 
That Afternoon, Mr. Western, for the
first Time, acquainted his Daughter with
his Intention; telling her, he knew very well
that she had heard it before from her Aunt. 
Sophia looked very grave upon this, nor
could she prevent a few Pearls from stealing
into her Eyes. ‘Come, come,’ says
Western, ‘none of your Maidenish Airs; 
I know all; I assure you, Sister hath told
me all.’ 

‘Is it possible,’ says Sophia, ‘that my
Aunt can have betrayed me already?’ ‘Ay,
ay,’ says Western, ‘betrayed you! ay. 
Why, you betrayed yourself yesterday at
Dinner. You shewed your Fancy very
plainly, I think. But you young Girls
never know what you would be at. So
you cry because I am going to marry
you to the Man you are in Love with! 
Your Mother, I remember, whimpered
and whined just in the same Manner; but
it was all over within twenty-four Hours
after we were married: Mr. Blifil is a
brisk young Man, and will soon put an
End to your Squeamishness. Come,
chear up, chear up, I expect un every
Minute.’ 
Sophia was now convinced that her Aunt
had behaved honourably to her; and she
determined to go through that disagreeable
Afternoon with as much Resolution
as possible, and without giving the least
Suspicion in the World to her Father. 
Mr. Blifil soon arrived; and Mr. Western
soon after withdrawing, left the young
Couple together. 

Here a long Silence of near a Quarter
of an Hour ensued: For the Gentleman
who was to begin the Conversation had all
that unbecoming Modesty which consists in
Bashfulness. He often attempted to speak,
and as often suppressed his Words just at
the very Point of Utterance. At last out
they broke in a Torrent of far-fetched and
high-strained Compliments, which were answered,
on her Side, by downcast Looks,
half Bows and civil Monosyllables. Blifil
from his Inexperience in the Ways of Women,
and from his Conceit of himself, took
this Behaviour for a modest Assent to
his Courtship; and when to shorten a
Scene which she could no longer support,
Sophia rose up and left the Room, he imputed
that too, merely to Bashfulness, and comforted
himself, that he should soon have
enough of her Company. 
He was indeed perfectly well satisfied
with his Prospect of success: For as to that
entire and absolute Possession of the Heart
of his Mistress, which romantic Lovers require,
the very Idea of it never entered his
Head. Her Fortune and her Person were
the sole Objects of his Wishes, of which he
made no Doubt soon to obtain the absolute 

Property; as Mr. Western's Mind was so
earnestly bent on the Match; and as he
well knew the strict Obedience which Sophia
was always ready to pay to her Father's
Will, and the greater still which her Father
would exact, if there was Occasion. This Authority,
therefore, together with the Charms
which he fancied in his own Person and
Conversation, could not fail, he thought, of
succeeding with a young Lady, whose Inclinations,
were, he doubted not, entirely
disengaged. 
Of Jones he certainly had not even the
least Jealousy; and I have often thought it
wonderful that he had not. Perhaps he
imagined the Character which Jones bore
all over the Country, (how justly let the
Reader determine) of being one of the wildest
Fellows in England, might render him
odious to a Lady of the most exemplary
Modesty. Perhaps his Suspicions might be
laid asleep by the Behaviour of Sophia, and
of Jones himself, when they were all in
Company together. Lastly, and indeed
principally, he was well assured there was
not another Self in the Case. He fancied
that he knew Jones to the Bottom, and had
in reality a great Contempt for his Understanding,
for not being more attached to 

his own Interest. He had no Apprehension
that Jones was in Love with Sophia; and as
for any lucrative Motives, he imagined they
would sway very little with so silly a Fellow. 
Blifil, moreover, thought the Affair
of Molly Seagrim still went on, and indeed
believed it would end in Marriage: For
Jones really loved him from his Childhood,
and had kept no Secret from him, till his
Behaviour on the Sickness of Mr. Allworthy
had entirely alienated his Heart; and it was
by means of the Quarrel which had ensued
on this Occasion, and which was not yet
reconciled, that Mr. Blifil knew nothing of
the Alteration which had happened in the
Affection which Jones had formerly bore 
towards Molly. 
From these Reasons, therefore, Mr. Blifil
saw no Bar to his Success with Sophia. He
concluded, her Behaviour was like that of
all other young Ladies on a first Visit from
a Lover, and it had indeed entirely answered
his Expectations. 
Mr. Western took Care to way-lay the
Lover at his Exit from his Mistress. He
found him so elevated with his Success, so
enamoured with his Daughter, and so satisfied
with her Reception of him, that the 

old Gentleman began to caper and dance
about his Hall, and by many other antic
Actions, to express the Extravagance of
his Joy: For he had not the least Command
over any of his Passions; and that
which had at any Time the Ascendant in
his Mind, hurried him to the wildest Excesses. 
As soon as Blifil was departed, which
was not till after many hearty Kisses and
Embraces bestowed on him by Western, the
good Squire went instantly in Quest of his
Daughter, whom he no sooner found than
he poured forth the most extravagant Raptures,
bidding her chuse what Clothes and
Jewels she pleased; and declaring that he
had no other Use for Fortune but to make
her happy. He then caressed her again
and again with the utmost Profusion of Fondness,
called her by the most endearing
Names, and protested she was his only Joy
on Earth. 
Sophia perceiving her Father in this Fit
of Affection, which she did not absolutely
know the Reason of (for Fits of Fondness
were not unusual to him, tho' this was rather
more violent than ordinary) thought
she should never have a better Opportunity 

of disclosing herself than at present; as far
at least, as regarded Mr. Blifil; and she too-well
foresaw the Necessity which she should
soon be under of coming to a full Explanation. 
After having thanked the Squire,
therefore for all his Professions of Kindness,
she added, with a Look full of inexpressible
Softness, ‘And is it possible my Papa can
be so good to place all his Joy in his
Sophy's Happiness?’ which Western having
confirmed by a great Oath, and a Kiss; 
she then laid hold of his Hand, and falling
on her Knees, after many warm and
passionate Declarations of Affection and
Duty, she begged him ‘not to make her
the most miserable Creature on Earth,
by forcing her to marry a Man whom she
detested. This I entreat of you, dear
Sir,’ said she, ‘for your Sake as well as
my own, since you are so very kind to
tell me your Happiness depends on mine.’ 
‘How! what!’ says Western, staring
wildly.’ ‘O Sir,’ continued she, ‘not only
your poor Sophy's Happiness; her very
Life, her Being depends upon your granting
her Request. I cannot live with Mr.
Blifil. To force me into this Marriage,
would be killing me.’ ‘You can't live
with Mr. Blifil!’ says Western. ‘No, upon
my Soul I can't,’ answered Sophia. 

‘Then die and be d&wblank;ned,’ cries he, spurning
her from him. ‘Oh! Sir,’ cries Sophia,
catching hold of the Skirt of his Coat,
‘take Pity on me, I beseech you. Don't
look, and say such cruel—Can you be
unmoved while you see your Sophy in this
dreadful Condition? Can the best of Fathers
break my Heart? Will he kill me
by the most painful, cruel, lingering
Death?’ ‘Pooh! Pooh!’ cries the Squire,
‘all Stuff and Nonsense, all maidenish
Tricks. Kill you indeed! Will Marriage
kill you?’ —‘Oh! Sir,’ answered Sophia,
‘such a Marriage is worse than Death— 
He is not even indifferent, I hate and detest
him. —If you detest un never so
much,’ cries Western, ‘you shall ha' un.’ 
This he bound by an Oath too shocking to
repeat, and after many violent Asseverations,
concluded in these Words. ‘I am resolved
upon the Match, and unless you
consent to it, I will not give you a Groat,
not a single Farthing; no, tho' I saw
you expiring with Famine in the Street,
I would not relieve you with a Morsel of
Bread. This is my fixed Resolution, and
so I leave you to consider on it.’ He
then broke from her with such Violence,
that her Face dashed against the Floor, and 

he burst directly out of the Room, leaving
poor Sophia prostrate on the Ground. 
When Western came into the Hall, he
there found Jones; who seeing his Friend
looking wild, pale, and almost breathless,
could not forbear enquiring the Reason of
all these melancholy Appearances. Upon
which the Squire immediately acquainted
him with the whole Matter, concluding
with bitter Denunciations against Sophia,
and very pathetic Lamentations of the Misery
of all Fathers who are so unfortunate
to have Daughters. 
Jones, to whom all the Resolutions which
had been taken in Favour of Blifil were yet
a Secret, was at first almost struck dead
with this Relation; but recovering his Spirits
a little, mere Despair, as he afterwards
said, inspired him to mention a Matter to
Mr. Western, which seemed to require more
Impudence than a human Forehead was
ever gifted with. He desired Leave to go
to Sophia, that he might endeavour to obtain
her Concurrence with her Father's Inclinations. 
If the Squire had been as quick-sighted,
as he was remarkable for the contrary, 

Passion might at present very well have
blinded him. He thanked Jones for offering
to undertake the Office, and said, ‘Go,
go, prithee, try what can'st do;’ and
then swore many execrable Oaths that he
would turn her out of Doors unless she
consented to the Match. 



The Meeting between Jones and Sophia. 
Jones departed instantly in Quest
of Sophia, whom he found just risen
from the Ground where her Father had
left her, with the Tears trickling from her
Eyes, and the Blood running from her
Lips. He presently ran to her, and with
a Voice full at once of Tenderness and
Terrour, cried, ‘O my Sophia, what means
this dreadful Sight!’ —She looked softly
at him for a Moment before she spoke,
and then said, ‘Mr. Jones, for Heaven's
Sake, how came you here? —Leave me,
I beseech you, this Moment.’ ‘Do not,’ 
says he, ‘impose so harsh a Command
upon me—my Heart bleeds faster than
those Lips. O Sophia, how easily could
I drain my Veins to preserve one Drop of 

that dear Blood.’ ‘I have too many
Obligations to you already,’ answered
she, ‘for sure you meant them such. — 
Here she looked at him tenderly almost a
Minute, and then bursting into an Agony,
cried,—‘O Mr. Jones,—why did you
save my Life?—my Death would have
been happier for us both.’ —‘Happier
for us both!’ cried he, ‘Could Racks or
Wheels kill me so painfully as Sophia's! — 
I cannot bear the dreadful Sound—Do
I live but for her?’ —Both his Voice and
Look were full of inexpressible Tenderness
when he spoke these Words, and at
the same Time he laid gently hold on her
Hand, which she did not withdraw from
him; to say the Truth, she hardly knew
what she did or suffered. A few Moments
now passed in Silence between these Lovers,
while his Eyes were eagerly fixed on Sophia,
and hers declining towards the Ground; 
at last she recovered Strength enough to
desire him again to leave her; for that her
certain Ruin would be the Consequence of
their being found together; adding,— 
‘O Mr. Jones, you know not, you know
not what hath passed this cruel Afternoon.’ 
‘I know all, my Sophia,’ answered he; 
‘your cruel Father hath told me all, and
he himself hath sent me hither to you.’ 

‘My Father sent you to me!’ replied she,
‘sure you dream.’ ‘Would to Heaven,’ 
cries he, ‘it was but a Dream. O Sophia,
your Father hath sent me to you, to be
an Advocate for my odious Rival, to solicite
you in his Favour—I took any
Means to get Access to you—O speak
to me, Sophia, comfort my bleeding
Heart. Sure no one ever loved, ever
doated like me. Do not unkindly withhold
this dear, this soft, this gentle Hand
—One Moment, perhaps, tears you for
ever from me—Nothing less than this
cruel Occasion could, I believe, have ever
conquered the Respect and Awe, with
which you have inspired me.’ She stood
a Moment silent and covered with Confusion,
then lifting up her Eyes gently towards
him, she cried, ‘What would Mr.
Jones have me say?’ ‘O do but promise,’ 
cries he, ‘that you never will
give yourself to Blifil.’ ‘Name not,’ 
answered she, ‘the detested Sound. Be
assured I never will give him what it is
in my Power to with-hold from him.’ 
‘Now then,’ cries he, ‘while you are so
perfectly kind, go a little farther, and
add that I may hope.’ —‘Alas,’ says she,
‘Mr. Jones, whither will you drive me? 
What Hope have I to bestow? You know 

my Father's Intentions.’ —‘But I know,’ 
answered he, ‘your Compliance with them
cannot be compelled.’ ‘What,’ says
she, ‘must be the dreadful Consequence of
my Disobedience? My own Ruin is my
least Concern. I cannot bear the Thoughts
of being the Cause of my Father's Misery.’ 
‘He is himself the Cause,’ cries Jones,
‘by exacting a Power over you which
Nature hath not given him. Think on
the Misery which I am to suffer, if I am
to lose you, and see on which Side
Pity will turn the Ballance.’ ‘Think
of it!’ replied she, ‘can you imagine
I do not feel the Ruin which I must bring
on you, should I comply with your Desire
—It is that Thought which gives
me Resolution to bid you fly from me for
ever, and avoid your own Destruction.’ 
‘I fear no Destruction,’ cries he, ‘but
the Loss of Sophia; if you would save
me from the most bitter Agonies, recall
that cruel Sentence—Indeed, I can never
part with you, indeed I cannot.’ 
The Lovers now stood both silent and
trembling, Sophia being unable to withdraw
her Hand from Jones, and he almost
as unable to hold it; when the Scene,
which I believe some of my Readers will 

think had lasted long enough, was interrupted
by one of so different a Nature,
that we shall reserve the Relation of it for a
different Chapter. 



Being of a much more tempestuous Kind than
the former. 
Before we proceed with what now
happened to our Lovers, it may be
proper to recount what had past in the
Hall, during their tender Interview. 
Soon after Jones had left Mr. Western in
the Manner above-mentioned, his Sister
came to him; and was presently informed
of all that had past between her Brother
and Sophia, relating to Blifil. 
This Behaviour in her Niece, the good
Lady construed to be an absolute Breach of
the Condition, on which she had engaged
to keep her Love for Mr. Jones a Secret. 
She considered herself, therefore, at full
Liberty to reveal all she knew to the Squire,
which she immediately did in the most explicite 

Terms, and without any Ceremony
or Preface. 
The Idea of a Marriage between Jones
and his Daughter, had never once entered
into the Squire's Head, either in the warmest
Minutes of his Affection towards that
young Man, or from Suspicion, or on
any other Occasion. He did indeed consider
a Parity of Fortune and Circumstances,
to be physically as necessary an Ingredient
in Marriage, as Difference of Sexes, or any
other Essential; and had no more Apprehension
of his Daughter's falling in Love
with a poor Man, than with any Animal of
a different Species. 
He became, therefore, like one Thunderstruct
at his Sister's Relation. He was, at
first, incapable of making any Answer,
having been almost deprived of his Breath
by the Violence of the Surprize. This,
however, soon returned, and, as is usual
in other Cases after an Intermission, with
redoubled Force and Fury. 
The first Use he made of the Power of
Speech, after his Recovery from the sudden
Effects of his Astonishment, was to discharge
a round Volley of Oaths and Imprecations. 

After which he proceeded hastily
to the Apartment, where he expected
to find the Lovers, and murmured, or indeed,
rather roared forth Intentions of Revenge
every Step he went. 
As when two Doves, or two Wood-pigeons,
or as when Strephon and Phillis
(for that comes nearest to the Mark) are retired
into some pleasant solitary Grove, to
enjoy the delightful Conversation of Love; 
that bashful Boy who cannot speak in
Public, and is never a good Companion to
more than two at a Time. Here while every
Object is serene, should hoarse Thunder
burst suddenly through the shattered Clouds,
and rumbling roll along the Sky, the
frightened Maid starts from the mossy
Bank or verdant Turf; the pale Livery of
Death succeeds the red Regimentals in which
Love had before drest her Cheeks; Fear
shakes her whole Frame, and her Lover scarce
supports her trembling, tottering Limbs. 
Or as when two Gentlemen, Strangers
to the wonderous Wit of the Place, are
cracking a Bottle together at some Inn or
Tavern at Salisbury, if the great Dowdy who
acts the Part of a Madman, as well as some
of his Setters-on do that of a Fool, should 

rattle his Chains, and dreadfully hum forth
the grumbling Catch along the Gallery; 
the frighted Strangers stand aghast, scared at
the horrid Sound, they seek some Place of
Shelter from the approaching Danger, and
if the well-barred Windows did admit their
Exit, would venture their Necks to escape
the threatning Fury now coming upon
them. 
So trembled poor Sophia, so turned she
pale at the Noise of her Father, who in a
Voice most dreadful to hear, came on
swearing, cursing and vowing the Destruction
of Jones. To say the Truth, I believe
the Youth himself would, from some prudent
Considerations, have preferred another Place
of Abode at this Time, had his Terrour
on Sophia's Account given him Liberty to
reflect a Moment on what any otherways
concerned himself, than as his Love made
him partake whatever affected her. 
And now the Squire having burst open
the Door, beheld an Object which instantly
suspended all his Fury against Jones; this
was the ghastly Appearance of Sophia, who
had fainted away in her Lover's Arms. 
This tragical Sight Mr. Western no sooner
beheld, than all his Rage forsook him, he 

roared for Help with his utmost Violence; 
ran first to his Daughter, then back to the
Door, calling for Water, and then back
again to Sophia, never considering in whose
Arms she then was, nor, perhaps, once recollecting
that there was such a Person in
the World as Jones: For, indeed, I believe,
the present Circumstances of his Daughter
were now the sole Consideration
which employed his Thoughts. 
Mrs. Western and a great Number of
Servants soon came to the Assistance of Sophia,
with Water, Cordials, and every Thing
necessary on those Occasions. These were
applied with such Success, that Sophia in a
very few Minutes began to recover, and
all the Symptoms of Life to return. Upon
which she was presently led off by her own
Maid and Mrs. Western; nor did that good
Lady depart without leaving some wholsome
Admonitions with her Brother, on
the dreadful Effects of his Passion, or, as
she pleased to call it, Madness. 
The Squire, perhaps, did not understand
this good Advice, as it was delivered in
obscure Hints, Shrugs, and Notes of Admiration; 
at least, if he did understand it,
he profited very little by it: For no sooner 

was he cured of his immediate Fears for
his Daughter, than he relapsed into his
former Frenzy, which must have produced
an immediate Battle with Jones, had not
Parson Supple, who was a very strong
Man, been present, and by mere Force restrained
the Squire from Acts of Hostility. 
The Moment Sophia was departed, Jones
advanced in a very suppliant Manner to Mr.
Western, whom the Parson held in his
Arms, and begged him to be pacify'd; 
for that while he continued in such a Passion
it would be impossible to give him any
Satisfaction. 
‘I wull have Satisfaction o' thee,’ answered
the Squire, ‘so doff thy Clothes. At
unt half a Man, and I'll lick thee as well
as wast ever licked in thy Life.’ He then
bespattered the Youth with Abundance of
that Language, which passes between Country
Gentlemen who embrace opposite Sides
of the Question; with frequent Applications
to him to salute that Part which is
generally introduced into all Controversies,
that arise among the lower Orders of
the English Gentry, at Horse-races, Cock-matches,
and other public Places. Allusions 

to this Part are likewise often made for the
Sake of the Jest. And here, I believe, the
Wit is generally misunderstood. In Reality,
it lies in desiring another to kiss your
A&wblank; for having just before threatened to
kick his: For I have observed very accurately,
that no one ever desires you to
kick that which belongs to himself, nor offers
to kiss this Part in another. 
It may likewise seem surprizing, that in
the many thousand kind Invitations of this
Sort, which every one who hath conversed
with Country Gentlemen, must have heard,
no one, I believe, hath ever seen a single
Instance where the Desire hath been complied
with. A great Instance of their
Want of Politeness: For in Town, nothing
can be more common than for the
finest Gentlemen to perform this Ceremony
every Day to their Superiors, without having
that Favour once requested of them. 
To all such Wit, Jones very calmly answered,
‘Sir, this Usage, may, perhaps,
cancel every other Obligation you have
conferred on me; but there is one you
can never cancel; nor will I be provoked
by your Abuse, to lift my Hand against
the Father of Sophia.’ 

At these Words, the Squire grew still
more outrageous than before; so that the
Parson begged Jones to retire, saying,
‘You behold, Sir, how he waxeth Wrath 
at your Abode here; therefore, let me
pray you not to tarry any longer. His
Anger is too much kindled for you to
commune with him at present. You
had better, therefore, conclude your
Visit, and refer what Matters you have
to urge in your Behalf, to some other Opportunity.’ 
Jones accepted this Advice with Thanks,
and immediately departed. The Squire
now regained the Liberty of his Hands,
and so much Temper as to express some
Satisfaction in the Restraint which had
been laid upon him; declaring that he
should certainly have beat his Brains out; 
and adding, ‘It would have vexed one
confoundedly to have been hanged for
such a Rascal.’ 
The Parson now began to triumph in the
Success of his Peace-making Endeavours,
and proceeded to read a Lecture against
Anger, which might, perhaps, rather
have tended to raise than to quiet that 

Passion in some hasty Minds. This Lecture
he enriched with many valuable Quotations
from the Antients, particularly from
Seneca; who hath, indeed, so well handled
this Passion, that none but a very angry
Man can read him without great Pleasure
and Profit. The Doctor concluded his
Harangue with the famous Story of Alexander
and Clytus; but as I find that entered
in my Common-Place under Title Drunkenness,
I shall not insert it here. 
The Squire took no Notice of this
Story, nor, perhaps, of any Thing he
said: For he interrupted him before he had
finished by calling for a Tankard of Beer; 
observing, (which is, perhaps, as true as
any Observation on this Fever of the Mind)
that Anger makes a Man dry. 
No sooner had the Squire swallowed a
large Draught than he renewed the Discourse
on Jones, and declared a Resolution
of going the next Morning early to acquaint
Mr. Allworthy. His Friend would
have dissuaded him from this, from the
mere Motive of Good-nature; but his
Dissuasion had no other Effect, than to
produce a large Volley of Oaths and Curses,
which greatly shocked the pious Ears of 

Supple; but he did not dare to remonstrate
against a Privilege, which the Squire claimed
as a free-born Englishman. To say
Truth, the Parson submitted to please his
Palate at the Squire's Table, at the Expence
of suffering this Violence now and
then to his Ears. He contented himself
with thinking he did not promote this evil
Practice, and that the Squire would not
swear an Oath the less if he never entered
within his Gates. However, tho' he was
not guilty of ill Manners by rebuking a
Gentleman in his own House, he paid him
off obliquely in the Pulpit; which had not,
indeed, the good Effect of working a Reformation
in the Squire himself, yet it so
far operated on his Conscience, that he put
the Laws very severely in Execution against
others, and the Magistrate was the only
Person in the Parish who could swear with
Impunity. 



In which Mr. Western visits Mr. Allworthy. 
Mr. Allworthy was noow retired from
Breakfast with his Nephew, well satisfied
with the Report of the young Gentleman's 

successful Visit to Sophia (for he greatly desired the Match, more on Account of the
young Lady's Character than of her Riches)
when Mr. Western broke abruptly in upon
them, and without any Ceremony began as follows. 
‘There, you have done a fine Piece of
Work truly. You have brought up your
Bastard to a fine Purpose; not that I believe
you have had any Hand in it neither,
that is, as a Man may say, designedly; 
but there is a fine Kettle of Fish made
o't up at our House.’ ‘What can be
the Matter, Mr. Western?’ said Allworthy. 
O Matter enew of all Conscience; my
Daughter hath fallen in Love with your
Bastard, that's all, but I won't ge her a
Hapenny, not the Twentieth Part of a
Brass Farthing. I always thought what
would come o' breeding up a Bastard like
a Gentleman, and letting un come about
to Volk's Houses. Its well vor un I could
not get at un, I'd a licked un, I'd a spoil'd
his Caterwauling, I'd a taught the Son of
a Whore to meddle with Meat for his
Master. He shan't ever have a Morsel
of Meat of mine, or a Farthing to buy
it: If she will ha un, one Smock shall be
her Portion. I'll sooner ge my Esteate 

to the zinking Fund, that it may be sent
to Hannover to corrupt our Nation with.’ 
‘I am heartily sorry,’ cries Allworthy. 
‘Pox o' your Sorrow,’ says Western, ‘it
will do me Abundance of Good, when I
have lost my only Child, my poor Sophy,
that was the Joy of my Heart, and all the
Hope and Comfort of my Age; but I
am resolved I will turn her out o' Doors,
she shall beg and starve and rot in the
Streets. Not one Hapenny, not a Hapenny
shall she ever hae o' mine. The
Son of a Bitch was always good at finding
a Hare sitting; an be rotted to'n, I little
thought what Puss he was looking after; 
but it shall be the worst he ever vound
in his Life. She shall be no better than
Carrion; the Skin o'er is all he shall ha,
and zu you may tell un.’ ‘I am in Amazement,’ 
cries Allworthy, ‘at what
you tell me, after what passed between
my Nephew and the young Lady no
longer ago than Yesterday.’ ‘Yes,
Sir,’ answered Western, ‘it was after
what passed between your Nephew and
she that the whole Matter came out. Mr.
Blifil there was no sooner gone than the
Son of a Whore came lurching about
the House. Little did I think when I
used to love him for a Sportsman, that 

he was all the while a poaching after
my Daughter.’ ‘Why, truly,’ says Allworthy,
‘I could wish you had not given
him so many Opportunities with her; 
and you will do me the Justice to acknowledge,
that I have always been averse
to his staying so much at your
House, tho' I own I had no Suspicion of
this Kind.’ ‘Why, Zounds!’ cries Western,
‘who could have thought it? What
the Devil had she to do wi'n? He did
not come there a courting to her, he came
there a hunting with me.’ ‘But was it
possible,’ says Allworthy, ‘that you should
never discern any Symptoms of Love
between them, when you have seen them
so often together?’ ‘Never in my Life,
as I hope to be saved,’ cries Western. I
never so much as seed him kiss her in all
my Life; and so far from courting her,
he used rather to be more silent when
she was in Company than at any other
Time: And as for the Girl, she was always
less civil to'n than to any young
Man that came to the House. As to
that Matter, I am not more easy to be deceived
than another, I would not have
you think I am, Neighbour.’ Allworthy
could scarce refrain Laughter at this; but
he resolved to do a Violence to himself: 

For he perfectly well knew Mankind, and
had too much good Breeding and good
Nature to offend the Squire in his present
Circumstances. He then asked Western
what he would have him do upon this Occasion. 
To which the other answered,
‘That he would have him keep the Rascal
away from his House, and that he would
go and lock up the Wench: For he was
resolved to make her marry Mr. Blifil in
Spite of her Teeth.’ He then shook
Blifil by the Hand, and swore he would
have no other Son-in-law. Presently after
which he took his Leave, saying,
his House was in such Disorder, that it
was necessary for him to make Haste home,
to take care his Daughter did not give
him the Slip; and as for Jones, he swore if
he caught him at his House, he would qualify
him to run for the Gelding's Plate. 
When Allworthy and Blifil were again left
together, a long Silence ensued between
them; all which Interval the young Gentleman
filled up with Sighs, which proceeded
partly from Disappointment, but more
from Hatred: For the Success of Jones
was much more grievous to him, than the
Loss of Sophia. 

At length his Uncle asked him what he
was determined to do, and he answered in
the following Words. ‘Alas, Sir, can it
be a Question what Step a Lover will
take, when Reason and Passion point different
Ways? I am afraid it is too certain
he will, in that Dilemma, always follow
the latter. Reason dictates to me,
to quit all Thoughts of a Woman who
places her Affections on another; my
Passion bids me hope she may, in Time,
change her Inclinations in my Favour. 
Here, however, I conceive an Objection
may be raised, which if it could not fully
be answered, would totally deter me from
any further Pursuit. I mean the Injustice
of endeavouring to supplant another, in
a Heart of which he seems already in
Possession; but the determined Resolution
of Mr. Western shews, that in this
Case, I shall by so doing, promote the
Happiness of every Party; not only
that of the Parent, who will thus be preserved
from the highest Degree of Misery,
but of both the others, who must be undone
by this Match. The Lady, I am
sure, will be undone in every Sense: For
besides the Loss of most Part of her own
Fortune, she will be married not only 

to a Beggar, but the little Fortune which
her Father cannot with-hold from her,
will be squandered on that Wench, with
whom I know he yet converses—Nay,
that is a Trifle: For I know him to be
one of the worst Men in the World: For
had my dear Uncle known what I have
hitherto endeavoured to conceal, he must
have long since abandoned so profligate a
Wretch.’ ‘How,’ said Allworthy, ‘hath
he done any Thing worse than I already
know? Tell me, I beseech you.’ ‘No,’ 
replied Blifil, ‘it is now past, and perhaps
he may have repented of it.’ ‘I command
you on your Duty,’ said Allworthy,
to tell me what you mean.’ ‘You know,
Sir,’ says Blifil, ‘I never disobeyed you; 
but I am sorry I mentioned it, since it
may now look like Revenge, whereas, I
thank Heaven, no such Motive ever entered
my Heart; and if you oblige me
to discover it, I must be his Petitioner to
you for your Forgiveness.’ ‘I will have
no Conditions,’ answered Allworthy, ‘I
think I have shewn Tenderness enough
towards him, and more, perhaps, than you
ought to thank me for.’ ‘More, indeed,
I fear than he deserved,’ cries Blifil, ‘for
in the very Day of your utmost Danger,
when myself and all the Family were in 

Tears, he filled the House with Riot and
Debauchery. He drank and sung and
roared, and when I gave him a gentle
Hint of the Indecency of his Actions, he
fell into a violent Passion, swore many
Oaths, called me Rascal, and struck me.’ 
‘How!’ cries Allworthy, ‘did he dare to
strike you?’ ‘I am sure,’ cries Blifil,
I have forgiven him that long ago. I
wish I could so easily forget his Ingratitude
to the best of Benefactors; and yet,
even that, I hope you will forgive him,
since he must have certainly been possessed
with the Devil: For that very Evening,
as Mr. Thwackum and myself were
taking the Air in the Fields, and exulting
in the good Symptoms which then
first began to discover themselves,
we unluckily saw him engaged with a
Wench in a Manner not fit to be mentioned. 
Mr. Thwackum, with more Boldness
than Prudence, advanced to rebuke
him, (when, I am sorry to say it,) he fell
upon the worthy Man, and beat him so
outragiously, that I wish he may have yet
recovered the Bruises. Nor was I without
my Share of the Effects of his Malice,
while I endeavoured to protect my
Tutor: But that I have long forgiven,
nay I prevailed with Mr. Thwackum to 

forgive him too, and not to inform you of
a Secret which I feared might be fatal to
him. And now, Sir, since I have unadvisedly
dropped a Hint of this Matter,
and your Commands have obliged me to
discover the whole, let me intercede with
you for him.’ ‘O Child,’ said Allworthy,
I know not whether I should blame or
applaud your Goodness, in concealing
such Villany a Moment; but where is
Mr. Thwackum? Not that I want any
Confirmation of what you say; but I will
examine all the Evidence of this Matter,
to justify to the World the Example I am
resolved to make of such a Monster.’ 
Thwackum was now sent for, and presently
appeared. He corroborated every
Circumstance which the other had deposed. 
Nay, he produced the Record upon his Breast,
where the Hand-writing of Mr. Jones remained
very legible in black and blue. He
concluded with declaring to Mr. Allworthy,
that he should have long since informed him
of this Matter, had not Mr. Blifil, by the
most earnest Interpositions, prevented him. 
‘He is,’ says he, ‘an excellent Youth; 
though such Forgiveness of Enemies is
carrying the Matter too far.’ 

In reality, Blifil had taken some Pains
to prevail with the Parson, and to prevent
the Discovery at that Time; for which he
had many Reasons. He knew that the
Minds of Men are apt to be softened and
relaxed from their usual Severity by Sickness. 
Besides, he imagined that if the
Story was told when the Fact was so recent,
and the Physician about the House,
who might have unravelled the real Truth,
he should never be able to give it the malicious
Turn which he intended. Again,
he resolved to hoard up this Business, till
the Indiscretion of Jones should afford some
additional Complaints; for he thought the
joint Weight of many Facts falling upon
him together, would be the most likely to
crush him; and he watched therefore some
such Opportunity as that, with which Fortune
had now kindly presented him. Lastly,
by prevailing with Thwackum to conceal the
Matter for a Time, he knew he should confirm
an Opinion of his Friendship to Jones,
which he had greatly laboured to establish in
Mr. Allworthy. 




A short Chapter; but which contains sufficient
Matter to affect the good-natured
Reader. 
It was Mr. Allworthy's Custom never to
punish any one, not even to turn away
a Servant, in a Passion. He resolved, therefore,
to delay passing Sentence on Jones till
the Afternoon. 
The poor young Man attended at Dinner,
as usual; but his Heart was too much
loaded to suffer him to eat. His Grief too
was a good deal aggravated by the unkind
Looks of Mr. Allworthy; whence he concluded
that Western had discovered the
whole Affair between him and Sophia: But
as to Mr. Blifil's Story, he had not the least
Apprehension; for of much the greater Part
he was entirely innocent, and for the Residue,
as he had forgiven and forgotten it
himself, so he suspected no Remembrance
on the other Side. When Dinner was over,
and the Servants departed, Mr. Allworthy
began to harangue. He set forth, in a long
Speech, the many Iniquities of which Jones 

had been guilty, particularly those which
this Day had brought to light, and concluded
by telling him, ‘that unless he
could clear himself of the Charge, he was
resolved to banish him from his Sight for
ever.’ 
Many Disadvantages attended poor Jones
in making his Defence; nay, indeed he
hardly knew his Accusation: For as Mr.
Allworthy, in recounting the Drunkenness,
&c. while he lay ill, out of Modesty sunk
every think that related particularly to himself,
which indeed principally constituted
the Crime, Jones could not deny the
Charge. His Heart was, besides, almost
broken already, and his Spirits were so
sunk, that he could say nothing for himself; 
but acknowledged the whole, and,
like a Criminal in Despair, threw himself
upon Mercy; concluding, ‘That tho' he
must own himself guilty of many Follies and
Inadvertencies, he hoped he had done
nothing to deserve what would be to him
the greatest Punishment in the World.’ 
Allworthy answered, ‘that he had forgiven
him too often already, in Compassion
to his Youth, and in Hopes of
his Amendment: That he now found he 

was an abandoned Reprobate, and such
as it would be criminal in any one to support
and encourage. Nay,’ said Mr. Allworthy
to him, ‘your audacious Attempt
to steal away the young Lady, calls upon
me to justify my own Character in punishing
you. The World, who have already
censured the Regard I have shewn for you,
may think, with some Colour at least of
Justice, that I connive at so base and barbarous
an Action. An Action of which
you must have known my Abhorrence,
and which, had you had any Concern for
my Ease and Honour, as well as for my
Friendship, you would never have thought
of undertaking. Fie upon it, young Man!
indeed there is scarce any Punishment
equal to your Crimes, and I can scarce
think myself justifiable in what I am now
going to bestow on you. However, as I
have educated you like a Child of my
own, I will not turn you naked into the
World. When you open this Paper,
therefore, you will find something which
may enable you, with Industry, to get
an honest Livelihood; but if you employ
it to worse Purposes, I shall not
think myself obliged to supply you farther,
being resolved, from this Day forward,
to converse no more with you on 

any Account. I cannot avoid saying, There
is no Part of your Conduct which I resent
more than your ill Treatment of that
good young Man (meaning Blifil) who
hath behaved with so much Tenderness
and Honour towards you.’ 
These last Words were a Dose almost too
bitter to be swallowed. A Flood of Tears
now gushed from the Eyes of Jones, and
every Faculty of Speech and Motion seemed
to have deserted him. It was some Time
before he was able to obey Allworthy's
peremptory Commands of departing; which
he at length did, having first kissed his
Hands with a Passion difficult to be affected,
and as difficult to be described. 
The Reader must be very weak, if when
he considers the Light in which Jones then
appeared to Mr. Allworthy, he should
blame the Rigour of his Sentence. And
yet all the Neighbourhood, either from this
Weakness, or from some worse Motive,
condemned this Justice and Severity as the
highest Cruelty. Nay, the very Persons
who had before censured the good Man for
the Kindness and Tenderness shewn to a
Bastard (his own, according to the general
Opinion) now cried out as loudly against 

turning his own Child out of Doors. The
Women especially were unanimous in taking
the Part of Jones, and raised more Stories
on the Occasion, than I have room, in this
Chapter, to set down. 
One thing must not be omitted, that in
their Censures on this Occasion, none ever
mentioned the Sum contained in the Paper
which Allworthy gave Jones, which was no
less than Five hundred Pounds; but all
agreed that he was sent away Pennyless,
and some said, naked from the House of
his inhuman Father. 



Containing Love Letters, &c. 
Jones was commanded to leave the
House immediately, and told, that his
Clothes and every thing else should be sent
to him whithersoever he should order them. 
He accordingly set out, and walked above
a Mile, not regarding, and indeed scarce
knowing whither he went. At length a
little Brook obstructing his Passage, he
threw himself down by the Side of it; nor
could he help muttering with some little Indignation, 

‘Sure my Father will not deny
me this Place to rest in?’ 
Here he presently fell into the most violent
Agonies, tearing his Hair from his
Head, and using most other Actions which
generally accompany Fits of Madness, Rage,
and Despair. 
When he had in this Manner vented the
first Emotions of Passion, he began to come
a little to himself. His Grief now took
another Turn, and discharged itself in a
gentler Way, till he became at last cool
enough to reason with his Passion, and to
consider what Steps were proper to be taken
in his deplorable Condition. 
And now the great Doubt was how to
act with regard to Sophia. The Thoughts
of leaving her almost rent his Heart asunder; 
but the Consideration of reducing her
to Ruin and Beggary still racked him, if
possible, more; and if the violent Desire of
possessing her Person could have suffered 
him to listen one Moment to this Alternative,
still he was by no means certain of her
Resolution to indulge his Wishes at so high
an Expence. The Resentment of Mr. Allworthy,
and the Injury he must do to his
Quiet, argued strongly against this latter; 

and lastly, the apparent Impossibility of his
Success, even if he would sacrifice all these
Considerations to it, came to his Assistance; 
and thus Honour at last, backed with Despair,
with Gratitude to his Benefactor,
and with real Love to his Mistress, got the
better of burning Desire, and he resolved
rather to quit Sophia, than to pursue her to
her Ruin. 
It is difficult for any who have not felt it,
to conceive the glowing Warmth which filled
his Breast, on the first Contemplation of
this Victory over his Passion. Pride flattered
him so agreeably, that his Mind perhaps
enjoyed perfect Happiness; but this
was only momentary, Sophia soon returned
to his Imagination, and allayed the Joy of
his Triumph with no less bitter Pangs than
a good-natured General must feel when he
surveys the bleeding Heaps, at the Price of
whose Blood he hath purchased his Laurels; 
for thousands of tender Ideas lay murdered
before our Conqueror. 
Being resolved, however, to pursue the
Paths of this Giant Honour, as the gigantic
Poet Lee calls it, he determined to write
a farewel Letter to Sophia; and accordingly
proceeded to a House not far off, where, 

being furnished with proper Materials, he
wrote as follows: 

Madam,
‘When you reflect on the Situation
in which I write, I am sure
your Good-nature will pardon any Inconsistency
or Absurdity which my Letter
contains; for every thing here flows from
a Heart so full, that no Language can
express its Dictates. 
‘I have resolved, Madam, to obey your
Commands, in flying for ever from your
dear, your lovely Sight. Cruel indeed
those Commands are; but it is a Cruelty
which proceeds from Fortune, not from
my Sophia. Fortune hath made it necessary,
necessary to your Preservation, to
forget there ever was such a Wretch as I
am. 
‘Believe me, I would not hint all my
Sufferings to you, if I imagined they
could possibly escape your Ears. I know
the Goodness and Tenderness of your
Heart, and would avoid giving you any
of those Pains which you always feel for
the Miserable. O let nothing which you
shall hear of my hard Fortune cause 

a Moment's Concern; for after the Loss
of you, every thing is to me a Trifle. 
‘O my Sophia! it is hard to leave you; 
it is harder still to desire you to forget
me; yet the sincerest Love obliges me to
both. Pardon my conceiving that any
Remembrance of me can give you Disquiet; 
but if I am so gloriously wretched,
sacrifice me every Way to your Relief. 
Think I never loved you; or think truly
how little I deserve you; and learn to
scorn me for a Presumption which can
never be too severely punished. —I am
unable to say more. —May Guardian
Angels protect you for ever.’ 
He was now searching his Pockets for
his Wax, but found none, nor indeed any
thing else, therein; for in Truth he had, in
his frantic Disposition, tossed every thing
from him, and, amongst the rest, his
Pocket-book, which he had received from
Mr. Allworthy, which he had never opened,
and which now first occurred to his Memory. 
The House supplied him with a Wafer for
his present Purpose, with which having sealed
his Letter, he returned hastily towards the
Brook Side, in order to search for the 

Things which he had there lost. In his
Way he met his old Friend Black George,
who heartily condoled with him on his Misfortune; 
for this had already reached his
Ears, and indeed those of all the Neighbourhood. 
Jones acquainted the Game-keeper with
his Loss, and he as readily went back with
him to the Brook, where they searched
every Tuft of Grass in the Meadow, as
well where Jones had not been, as where he
had been; but all to no Purpose, for they
found nothing: For indeed, though the
Things were then in the Meadow, they
omitted to search the only Place where they
were deposited to wit, in the Pockets of
the said George; for he had just before
found them, and being luckily apprized of
their Value, had very carefully put them up
for his own Use. 
The Game-keeper having exerted as much
Diligence in Quest of the lost Goods, as if
he had hoped to find them, desired Mr.
Jones to recollect if he had been in no other
Place; ‘For sure,’ said he, ‘if you had
lost them here so lately, the Things must
have been here still; for this is a very unlikely
Place for any one to pass by;’ and
indeed it was by great Accident that he 

himself had passed through that Field, in
order to lay Wires for Hares, with which
he was to supply a Poulterer at Bath the
next Morning. 
Jones now gave over all Hopes of recovering
his Loss, and almost all Thoughts
concerning it, and turning to Black George,
asked him earnestly, If he would do him
the greatest Favour in the World. 
George answered, with some Hesitation,
‘Sir, you know you may command me
whatever is in my Power, and I heartily
wish it was in my Power to do you any
Service.’ In fact, the Question staggered
him; for he had, by selling Game, amassed
a pretty good Sum of Money in Mr. Western's
Service, and was afraid that Jones
wanted to borrow some small Matter of
him; but he was presently relieved from his
Anxiety, by being desired to convey a Letter
to Sophia, which with great Pleasure he
promised to do. And indeed, I believe
there are few Favours which he would not
have gladly conferred on Mr. Jones; for he
bore as much Gratitude towards him as he
could, and was as honest as Men who love
Money better than any other Thing in the
Universe generally are. 

Mrs. Honour was agreed by both to be
the proper Means by which this Letter
should pass to Sophia. They then separated; 
the Game-keeper returned home to Mr.
Western's, and Jones walked to an Alehouse
at half a Mile's Distance, to wait for
his Messenger's Return. 
George no sooner came home to his Master's
House, than he met with Mrs. Honour; 
to whom, having first sounded her
with a few previous Questions, he delivered
the Letter for her Mistress, and received at
the same Time another from her for Mr.
Jones; which Honour told him she had carried
all that Day in her Bosom, and began to despair
of finding any Means of delivering it. 
The Game-keeper returned hastily and
joyfully to Jones, who having received Sophia's
Letter from him, instantly withdrew, and
eagerly breaking it open, read as follows: 

Sir,
‘It is impossible to express what I have
felt since I saw you. Your submitting,
on my Account, to such cruel Insults
from my Father, lays me under an
Obligation I shall ever own. As you
know his Temper, I beg you will, for 

my Sake, avoid him. I wish I had any
Comfort to send you; but believe this,
that nothing but the last Violence shall
ever give my Hand or Heart where you
would be sorry to see them bestowed.’ 
Jones read this Letter a hundred Times
over, and kissed it a hundred Times as often. 
His Passion now brought all tender
Desires back into his Mind. He repented
that he had writ to Sophia in the Manner
we have seen above; but he repented more
that he had made use of the Interval of his
Messenger's Absence to write and dispatch
a Letter to Mr. Allworthy, in which he had
faithfully promised and bound himself to
quit all Thoughts of his Love. However,
when his cool Reflections returned, he
plainly perceived that his Case was neither
mended nor altered by Sophia's Billet, unless
to give him some little Glimpse of Hope
from her Constancy, of some favourable
Accident hereafter. He therefore resumed
his Resolution, and taking leave of Black
George, set forward to a Town about five
Miles distant, whither he had desired Mr.
Allworthy, unless he pleased to revoke his
Sentence, to send his Things after him. 




The Behaviour of Sophia on the present Occasion; 
which none of her Sex will blame,
who are capable of behaving in the same
Manner. And the Discussion of a knotty
Point in the Court of Conscience. 
Sophia had passed the last twenty-four
Hours in no very desirable Manner.
During a large Part of them she had been
entertained by her Aunt, with Lecture, of
Prudence, recommending to her the Example
of the polite World, where Love (so
the good Lady said) is at present entirely
laughed at, and where Women consider
Matrimony, as Men do Offices of public
Trust, only as the Means of making their
Fortunes, and of advancing themselves in
the World. In commenting on which
Text Mrs. Western had displayed her Eloquence
during several Hours. 
These sagacious Lectures, though little
suited either to the Taste or Inclination of
Sophia, were, however, less irksome to her
than her own Thoughts, that formed the
Entertainment of the Night, during which
she never once closed her Eyes. 

But though she could neither sleep nor
rest in her Bed, yet, having no Avocation
from it, she was found there by her Father
at his Return from Allworthy's, which was
not till past Ten o'Clock in the Morning. 
He went directly up to her Apartment,
opened the Door, and seeing she was not
up—cried—‘Oh! you are safe then, and
I am resolved to keep you so.’ He then
locked the Door, and delivered the Key to
Honour, having first given her the strictest
Charge, with great Promises of Rewards
for her Fidelity, and most dreadful Menaces
of Punishment, in case she should betray
her Trust. 
Honour's Orders were not to suffer her
Mistress to come out of her Room without
the Authority of the Squire himself, and to
admit none to her but him and her Aunt; 
but she was herself to attend her with whatever
Sophia pleased, except only Pen, Ink, and
Paper, of which she was forbidden the Use. 
The Squire ordered his Daughter to dress
herself and attend him at Dinner; which
she obeyed; and having sat the usual Time,
was again conducted to her Prison. 
In the Evening, the Goaler Honour
brought her the Letter which she received 

from the Game-keeper. Sophia read it very
attentively twice or thrice over, and then
threw herself upon the Bed, and burst into
a Flood of Tears. Mrs. Honour expressed
great Astonishment at this Behaviour in her
Mistress; nor could she forbear very eagerly
begging to know the Cause of this Passion. 
Sophia made her no Answer for some
Time, and then starting suddenly up,
caught her Maid by the Hand, and cried,
‘O Honour! I am undone.’ ‘Marry forbid,’ 
cries Honour, ‘I wish the Letter
had been burnt before I had brought it
to your La'ship. I'm sure I thought it
would have comforted your La'ship, or
I would have seen it at the Devil before I
would have touch'd it.’ ‘Honour, says
Sophia, ‘you are a good Girl, and it is
vain to attempt concealing longer my
Weakness from you; I have thrown away
my Heart on a Man who hath forsaken
me.’ ‘And is Mr. Jones, answered the
Maid, ‘such a Perfidy Man?’ ‘He hath
taken his Leave of me’ says Sophia, ‘for ever
in that Letter. Nay, he hath desired me to
forget him. Could he have desired that, if
he had loved me? Could he have borne
such a Thought? could he have written
such a Word?’ ‘No certainly, Ma'am,’ 
cries Honour, ‘and to be sure, if the best
Man in England was to desire me to forget 

him, I'd take him at his Word. 
Marry come up! I am sure your La'ship
hath done him too much Honour ever
to think on him. A young Lady who
may take her Choice of all the young
Men in the County. And to be sure, if
I may be so presumptious as to offer my
poor Opinion, there is young Mr. Blifil,
who besides that he is come of honest
Parents, and will be one of the greatest
Squires all hereabouts, he is to be sure,
in my poor Opinion, a more handsomer,
and a more politer Man by half; and
besides, he is a young Gentleman of a
sober Character, and who may defy any
of the Neighbours to say black is his Eye: 
He follows no dirty Trollops, nor can
any Bastards be laid at his Door. Forget
him indeed! I thank Heaven I myself
am not so much at my last Prayers, as to
suffer any Man to bid me forget him
twice. If the best He that wears a Head
was for to go for to offer for to say such
an affronting Word to me, I would never
give him my Company afterwards, if
there was another young Man in the
Kingdom. And as I was a saying, to be
sure, there is young Mr. Blifil'—Name
not his detested Name,’ cries Sophia. ‘Nay,
Ma'am, says Honour, if your La'ship
doth not like him, there be more jolly 

handsome young Men that would court
your La'ship, if they had but the least
Encouragement. I don't believe there
is arrow young Gentleman in this County,
or in the next to it, that if your
La'ship was but to look as if you had a
Mind to him, would not come about to
make his Offers directly.’ ‘What a
Wretch dost thou imagine me,’ cries Sophia,
‘by affronting my Ears with such
Stuff! I detest all Mankind.’ ‘Nay, to
be sure, Ma'am,’ answered Honour, ‘your
La'ship hath had enough to give you a
Surfeit of them. To be used ill by such
a poor beggarly bastardly Fellow.’ ‘Hold
your blasphemous Tongue,’ cries Sophia,
how dare you mention his Name with
Disrespect before me? He use me ill? 
No, his poor bleeding Heart suffered
more when he writ the cruel Words, than
mine from reading them. O! he is all
heroic Virtue, and angelic Goodness. I
am ashamed of the Weakness of my own
Passion, for blaming what I ought to admire. 
—O Honour! it is my Good only
which he consults. To my Interest he
sacrifices both himself and me. —The
Apprehension of ruining me hath driven
him to Despair.’ ‘I am very glad,
says Honour, ‘to hear your La'ship
takes that into your Consideration: for 

to be sure, it must be nothing less than
Ruin, to give your Mind to one that is
turned out of Doors, and is not worth a
Farthing in the World.’ ‘Turned out
of Doors!’ cries Sophia hastily, ‘how!
what dost thou mean?’ ‘Why, to be sure,
Ma'am, my Master no sooner told Squire
Allworthy about Mr. Jones having offered
to make Love to your Ladyship, than
the Squire stripped him stark naked, and
turned him out of Doors.’ ‘Ha!’ says
Sophia, ‘have I been the cursed, wretched
Cause of his Destruction?—Turn'd naked
out of Doors! Here, Honour, take all
the Money I have; take the Rings from
my Fingers. —Here my Watch, carry
him all.—Go, find him immediately. 
For Heaven's Sake, Ma'am,’ answered
Mrs. Honour, ‘do but consider, if my
Master should miss any of these Things,
I should be made to answer for them. 
Therefore let me beg your Ladyship not
to part with your Watch and Jewels. 
Besides the Money, I think, is enough of
all Conscience; and as for that, my
Master can never know any thing of the
Matter.’ ‘Here then’, cries Sophia,
take every Farthing I am worth, find
him out immediately and give it him. 
Go, go, lose not a Moment. 

Mrs. Honour departed according to Orders,
and finding Black George below Stairs,
delivered him the Purse which contained
Sixteen Guineas, being indeed the whole
Stock of Sophia: For tho' her Father was
very liberal to her, she was much too generous
herself to be rich. 
Black George having received the Purse,
set forward towards the Alehouse; but in
the Way a Thought occurred to him, whether
he should not detain this Money likewise. 
His Conscience, however, immediately
started at this Suggestion, and began
to upbraid him with Ingratitude to his
Benefactor. To this his Avarice answered,
‘That his Conscience should have considered
that Matter before, when he deprived
poor Jones of his 500l. That having
quietly acquiesced in what was of so much
greater Importance, it was absurd, if not
downright Hypocrisy, to affect any Qualms
at this Trifle.’ In return to which, Conscience,
like a good Lawyer, attempted
to distinguish between an absolute Breach
of Trust, as here where the Goods were delivered,
and a bare Concealment of what
was found, as in the former Case. Avarice
presently treated this with Ridicule, called
it a Distinction without a Difference, and 

absolutely insisted, that when once all Pretensions
of Honour and Virtue were given
up in any one Instance, that there was no
Precedent for resorting to them upon a second
Occasion. In short, poor Conscience
had certainly been defeated in the Argument,
had not Fear stept in to her Assistance,
and very strenuously urged, that the
real Distinction between the two Actions,
did not lie in the different Degrees of Honour,
but of Safety: For that the secreting
the 500l. was a Matter of very little Hazard; 
whereas the detaining the Sixteen
Guineas was liable to the utmost Danger of
Discovery. 
By this friendly Aid of Fear, Conscience
obtained a compleat Victory in the Mind
of Black George, and after making him a few
Compliments on his Honesty, forced him
to deliver the Money to Jones. 



A short Chapter, containing a short Dialogue
between Squire Western and his Sister. 
Mrs. Western had been engaged abroad
all that Day. The Squire met her
at her Return home; and when she enquired
after Sophia, he acquainted her that
he had secured her safe enough. ‘She is 

locked up in Chamber,’ cries he, ‘and
Honour keeps the Key.’ As his Looks
were full of prodigious Wisdom and Sagacity
when he gave his Sister this Information,
it is probable he expected much
Applause from her for what he had done; 
but how was he disappointed, when with
a most disdainful Aspect, she cry'd, ‘Sure,
Brother, you are the weakest of all Men. 
Why will you not confide in me for the
Management of my Niece? Why will
you interpose? You have now undone
all that I have been spending my Breath
in order to bring about. While I have
been endeavouring to fill her Mind with
Maxims of Prudence, you have been
provoking her to reject them. English
Women, Brother, I thank Heaven, are
no Slaves. We are not to be locked up
like the Spanish and Italian Wives. We
have as good a Right to Liberty as yourselves. 
We are to be convinced by Reason
and Persuasion only, and not governed
by Force. I have seen the World,
Brother, and know what Arguments to
make Use of; and if your Folly had not
prevented me, should have prevailed with
her to form her Conduct by those Rules
of Prudence and Discretion which I formerly
taught her.’ ‘To be sure,’ said
the Squire, ‘I am always in the Wrong.’ 

‘Brother,’ answered the Lady, ‘you are
not in the Wrong, unless when you
meddle with Matters beyond your Knowledge. 
You must agree, that I have
seen most of the World; and happy had
it been for my Niece, if she had not been
taken from under my Care. It is by
living at home with you that she hath
learnt romantic Notions of Love and
Nonsense.’ ‘You don't imagine, I hope,
cries the Squire, ‘that I have taught her
any such Things.’ ‘Your Ignorance,
Brother,’ returned she, ‘as the great
Milton says, almost subdues my Patience.’*  
‘D&wblank;n Milton,’ answered the Squire,
if he had the Impudence to say so to my
Face, I'd lend him a Douse, thof he was
never so great a Man. Patience! an you
come to that, Sister, I have more Occasion
of Patience, to be used like an overgrown
School-boy as I am by you. Do
you think no one hath any Understanding,
unless he hath been about at Court? 
Pox! the World is come to a fine
Pass indeed, if we are all Fools, except a
a Parcel of Roundheads and Hannover
Rats. Pox! I hope the Times are a coming
that we shall make Fools of them,
and every Man shall enjoy his own. 
‘That's all, Sister, and every Man shall 

enjoy his own. I hope to zee it, Sister,
before the Hannover Rats have eat up all
our Corn, and left us nothing but Turneps
to feed upon.’ ‘I protest, Brother,’ 
cries she, ‘you are now got beyond my
Understanding. Your Jargon of Turneps
and Hannover Rats, is to me perfectly
unintelligible.’ ‘I believe,’ cries
he, ‘you don't care to hear o'em; but
the Country Interest may succeed one
Day or other for all that.’ ‘I wish,’ 
answered the Lady, ‘you would think a
little of your Daughter's Interest: For
believe me, she is in greater Danger
than the Nation.’ ‘Just now,’ said
he, ‘you chid me for thinking on her, and
would ha' her left to you.’ ‘And if you
will promise to interpose no more,’ answered
she, ‘I will, out of my Regard to
my Niece, undertake the Charge.’ ‘Well,
do then,’ said the Squire, ‘for you know
I always agreed, that Women are the
properest to manage Women.’ 
Mrs. Western then departed, muttering
something with an Air of Disdain, concerning
Women and the Management of the
Nation. She immediately repaired to Sophia's
Apartment, who was now, after a
Day's Confinement released again from her
Captivity. 