


Containing many surprizing Adventures,
which our Hero, with great
Greatness, atchieved. 
We will now leave our Hero to take
a short Repose, and return to Mr.
Snap's, where, at Wild's Departure, the
fair Theodosia had again betaken herself to
her Stocking, and Miss Letty had retired
up Stairs to Mr. Bagshot; but that Gentleman
had broken his Parole, and, having
conveyed himself below Stairs behind a
Door, he took the Opportunity of Wild's
Sally to make his Escape. We shall only
observe, that Miss Letty's Surprize was the
greater, as she had, notwithstanding her
Promise to the contrary, taken the Precaution
to turn the Key; but, in her Hurry,
she did it ineffectually. How wretched
must have been the Situation of this
young Creature, who had not only lost a
Lover, on whom she perfectly doated, but
was exposed to the Rage of an injured Father, 

tenderly jealous of his Honour, which
was deeply engaged to the Sheriff of London
and Middlesex, for the safe Custody of
the said Bagshot, and for which two very
good responsible Friends had given not only
their Words but their Bonds. 
But let us remove our Eyes from this
melancholy Object, and survey our Hero,
who, after a successless Search for Miss
Straddle, with wonderful Greatness of
Mind, and Steddiness of Countenance, went
early in the Morning to visit his Friend
Heartfree, at a Time when the common
Herd of Friends would have forsaken and
avoided him. He entered the Room with
a chearful Air, which he presently changed
into Surprize on seeing his Friend in a
Night-Gown, with his wounded Head
bound about with Linen, and looking extremely
pale from a great Profusion of
Blood. When Wild was informed by
Heartfree what had happened, he first expressed
great Sorrow, and afterwards suffered
as violent Agonies of Rage against the
Robbers to burst from him. This latter,
in Compassion to the deep Impressions his 

Misfortune seemed to make on his Friend,
endeavoured to lessen it as much as possible,
at the same Time exaggerating the Obligation
he owed to Wild, in which his Wife
likewise seconded him; and they breakfasted
with more Comfort than was reasonably to
be expected after such an Accident. Heartfree
expressing great Satisfaction that he
had put the four thousand Pound Note in
another Pocket-Book, adding, that such a
Loss would have been fatal to him; “for,
to confess the Truth to you, my dear
Friend, said he, I have had some Losses
lately, which have greatly perplexed my
Affairs, and though I have many Debts
due to me from People of great Fashion,
I assure you I know not where to be certain
of getting a Shilling.” Wild greatly
felicitated him on the lucky Accident
of preserving his Note, and then proceeded,
with much Acrimony, to inveigh against
the Barbarity of People of Fashion, who
kept Tradesmen out of their Money. 
While they amused themselves with
Discourses of this kind, Wild, meditating
within himself whether he should 

borrow or steal from his Friend, or indeed
whether he could not effect both, the Apprentice
brought a Bank-Note in to Heartfree,
which, he said, a Gentlewoman in the
Shop, who had been looking at some Jewels,
desired him to exchange. Heartfree looking
at the Back of it, immediately perceived
the Count's Endorsement, and presently
recollected it to be one of those he
had been robbed of. With this Discovery
he acquainted Wild, who, with the notable
Presence of Mind, and unchanged Complexion,
so essential to a GREAT Character,
advised him to proceed cautiously; and offered,
(as Mr. Heartfree himself was, he said,
too much flustered to examine the Woman
with sufficient Art) to take her into a Room
in his House alone. He would, he said, personate
the Master of the Shop, would pretend
to shew her some Jewels, and would undertake
to get sufficient Information out of her
to secure the Rogues, and most probably
all their Booty. This Proposal was readily
and thankfully accepted by Heartfree. 
Wild went immediately up Stairs into the
Room appointed, whither the Apprentice, 

according to Appointment, conducted the
Lady. 
The Apprentice was ordered down
Stairs the Moment the Lady entered the
Room; and Wild, having shut the Door,
approached her with great Ferocity in
his Looks, and began to expatiate on the
complicated Baseness of the Crime she had
been guilty of; but though he uttered many
good Lessons of Morality, as we doubt
whether from a particular Reason they may
work any very good Effect on our Reader,
we shall omit his Speech, and only mention
his Conclusion, which was by asking
her, what Mercy she could now expect
from him? The young Lady, who had
had a good Education, and had been more
than once present at the Old Baily, very
confidently denied the whole Charge, and
said, she had receiv'd the Note from a Friend. 
Wild then, raising his Voice, told her, she
should be immediately committed, and she
might depend on being convicted; “but,” 
added he, changing his Tone, “as I have
a violent Affection for thee, my dear
Straddle, if you will follow my Advice, 

I promise you on my Honour, to forgive
you, nor shall you be ever called in
Question on this Account. Why, what
would you have me to do, Mr. Wild, replied
the young Lady, with a pleasanter
Aspect. You must know then, said
Wild, the Money you picked out of my
Pocket; (nay, by G&wblank;d you did, and if
you offer to flinch, you shall be convicted
of it,) I won at Play of a Fellow who, it
seems, robbed my Friend of it; you
must, therefore, give an Information on
Oath against one Thomas Fierce, and
say, that you received the Note from
him, and leave the rest to me. I am certain,
Molly, you must be sensible of
your Obligations to me, who return
Good for Evil to you in this manner.” 
The Lady readily consented; and Mr. Wild
and she embraced and kissed each other in a
very tender and passionate Manner. 
Wild, having given the Lady a little further
Instruction, desired her to stay a few Minutes
behind him; then returned to his Friend,
and acquainted him that he had discovered
the whole Roguery, that the Woman had 

confessed from whom she had received the
Note, and had promised to give an Information
before a Justice of Peace; adding
he was concerned he could not attend him
thither, being obliged to go to the other
End of the Town to receive thirty Pounds,
which he was to pay that Evening. Heartfree
said that should not prevent him of his
Company, for he could easily lend him such
a Trifle: Which was accordingly done and
accepted, and Wild, Heartfree, and the
Lady went to the Justice together. 
The Warrant being granted, and the
Constable being acquainted by the Lady,
who received her Information from Wild
of Mr. Fierce's Haunts, he was easily apprehended,
and, being confronted with
Miss Straddle, who swore positively to him,
though she had never seen him before; he
was committed to Newgate, where he immediately
conveyed an Information to Wild
of what had happened, and in the Evening
received a Visit from him. 
WILD affected great Concern for his
Friend's Misfortune, and as great Surprize 

at the Means by which it was brought
about. However, he said, he must certainly
be mistaken in that Point, of his having
had no Acquaintance with her; that, as for
the Note, he had himself paid it away to a
Shopkeeper, and would endeavour, by all
safe Means, to enquire into the Secrets of
the Matter; that he would find out Miss
Straddle, and endeavour to take off her Evidence; 
which, he observed, did not come
home enough to endanger him; besides he
would secure him Witnesses of an Alibí,
and five or six to his Character; so that he
need be under no Apprehension, for his
Confinement till the Sessions would be his
only Punishment. 
FIERCE, who was greatly comforted
by these Assurances of his Friend, returned
him many Thanks, and both shaking
each other very earnestly by the Hand,
with a very hearty Embrace they separated. 
The Hero considered with himself,
that the single Evidence of Miss Straddle
would not be sufficient to convict Fierce, 

whom he resolved to hang, as he was the
Person who had principally refused to deliver
him the stipulated Share of the Booty; 
he therefore went in Quest of Mr. James
Sly, the Gentleman who had assisted in the
Exploit; and found, and acquainted him
with the apprehending of Fierce. Wild
then intimating his Fear, lest Fierce should
impeach Sly, advised him to be beforehand,
and go directly to a Justice of Peace,
and offer himself as an Evidence. Sly approved
Mr. Wild's Opinion, went directly
to a Magistrate, and was by him committed
to the Gate-house, with a Promise of
being admitted Evidence against his Companion. 
FIERCE was, in a few Days, brought
to his Trial at the Old Baily, when, to his
great Confusion, his old Friend Sly appeared
against him, as did Miss Straddle. 
His only Hopes were now in the Assistance
which our Hero had promised him. These
unhappily failed him: So that the Evidence
being plain against him, and he making
no Defence, the Jury convicted him, the 

Court condemned him, and Mr. Ketch executed
him. 
With such infinite Address, did this
truly great Man know to play with the
Passions of Men, and to set them at Variance
with each other, and to work his own
Purposes out of those Jealousies and Apprehensions,
which he was wonderfully
ready at creating, by Means of those great
Arts, which the Vulgar call Treachery,
Dissembling, Promising, Lying, Falshood,
&c. but which are by great Men summed
up in the collective Name of Policy,
or Politicks, or rather Pollitricks; an Art
of which, as it is the highest Excellence of
Human Nature, so perhaps, was our great
Man the most eminent Master. 