




Containing very mysterious Matter. 
Miss Mathews did not in the
least fall short of Mr. Booth in
Expressions of Tenderness. Her
Eyes, the most eloquent Orators on such
Occasions, exerted their utmost Force; and
at the Conclusion of his Speech, she cast a
Look as languishingly sweet, as ever Cleopatra
gave to Anthony. In real fact, this Mr.
Booth had been her first Love, and had
made those Impressions on her young Heart,
which the Learned in this Branch of Philosophy
affirm, and perhaps truly, are never
to be eradicated. 

When Booth had finished his Story, a
Silence ensued of some Minutes; an Interval
which the Painter would describe much
better than the Writer. Some Readers may
however be able to make pretty pertinent
Conjectures, by what I have said above,
especially when they are told that Miss Mathews
broke the Silence by a Sigh, and cried,
‘why is Mr. Booth unwilling to allow me
the Happiness of thinking my Misfortunes
have been of some little Advantage
to him? Sure the happy Amelia would
not be so selfish to envy me that Pleasure. 
No; not if she was as much the fondest
as she is the happiest of Women. Good
Heavens! Madam,’ said he, ‘do you
call my poor Amelia the happiest of
Women?’ ‘Indeed I do,’ answered she
briskly. —‘O Mr. Booth, there is a Speck
of White in her Fortune, which when it
falls to the Lot of a sensible Woman,
makes her full Amends for all the Crosses
which can attend her—Perhaps she may
be sensible of it; but if it had been my
blest Fate—O Mr. Booth, could I have
thought when we were first acquainted,
that the most agreeable Man in the World
had been capable of making the kind,
the tender, the affectionate Husband— 

the happy Amelia in those Days was unknown; 
Heaven had not then given her
a Prospect of the Happiness it intended
her—but yet it did intend it her: For
sure there is a Fatality in the Affairs of
Love; and the more I reflect on my own
Life, the more I am convinced of it. O
Heavens! how a thousand little Circumstances
crowd into my Mind. When you
first marched into our Town, you had then
the Colours in your Hand; as you passed
under the Window where I stood, my
Glove by accident dropt into the Street; 
you stopt, took up my Glove, and putting
it upon the Spike belonging to your
Colours, lifted it up to the Window. 
Upon this, a young Lady, who stood by,
said, So, Miss, the young Officer hath
accepted your Challenge. I blush'd then,
and I blush now, when I confess to you,
I thought you the prettiest young Fellow
I had ever seen; and, upon my Soul, I
believe you was then the prettiest Fellow
in the World’—Booth here made a low
Bow, and cried—‘O dear Madam, how
ignorant was I of my own Happiness!’ 
‘Would you really have thought so?’ answered
she, ‘however, there is some Politeness,
if there be no Sincerity in what you
say.’ Here the Governor of the enchanted 

Castle interrupted, and entering the
Room without any Ceremony, acquainted
the Lady and Gentleman, that it was locking-up
time; and addressing Booth, by the
Name of Captain, asked him if he would
not please to have a Bed; adding, that he
might have one in the next Room to the
Lady, but that it would come dear; for
that he never let a Bed in that Room under
a Guinea, nor could he afford it cheaper to
his Father. 
No Answer was made to this Proposal; 
but Miss Mathews, who had already learnt
some of the Ways of the House, said, she
believed Mr. Booth would like to drink a
Glass of something; upon which, the Governor
immediately trumpeted forth the
Praises of his Rack-Punch, and without
waiting for any farther Commands, presently
produced a large Bowl of that Liquor. 
The Governor having recommended the
Goodness of his Punch by a hearty Draught
began to revive the other Matter, saying
that he was just going to Bed, and must
first lock up. —‘But suppose,’ said Miss
Mathews, with a Smile, ‘the Captain and
I should have a Mind to sit up all Night
—With all my Heart, said the Governor; 

but I expect a Consideration for those
Matters. For my Part, I don't enquire
into what doth not concern me; but
single and double are two things. If I
lock up double, I expect half a Guinea; 
and I'm sure the Captain cannot think
that's out of the way—It is but the Price
of a Bagnio.’ 
Miss Mathews's Face became of the Colour
of Scarlet at those Words—However,
she mustered up her Spirits, and turning to
Booth, said, ‘what say you, Captain? for
my own Part, I had never less Inclination
to Sleep; which hath the greater Charms
for you, the Punch or the Pillow? I
hope, Madam,’ answered Booth, ‘you
have a better Opinion of me, than to
doubt my preferring Miss Mathews's Conversation
to either. I assure you,’ replied
she, ‘it is no Compliment to you, to say I
prefer yours to Sleep at this Time.’ 
The Governor then, having received his
Fee, departed; and turning the Key, left
the Gentleman and the Lady to themselves. 
In Imitation of him, we will lock up
likewise a Scene which we do not think
proper to expose to the Eyes of the Public. 

If any over curious Readers should be disappointed
on this Occasion, we will recommend
such Readers to the Apologies with
which certain gay Ladies have lately been
pleased to oblige the World, where they
will possibly find every thing recorded, that
past at this Interval. 
But tho' we decline painting the whole
Scene, it is not our Intention to conceal
from the World the Frailty of Mr. Booth,
or of his fair Partner, who certainly past
that Evening, in a Manner inconsistent with
the strict Rules of Virtue and Chastity. 
To say the Truth, we are much more
concerned for the Behaviour of the Gentleman,
than of the Lady, not only for his
Sake, but for the Sake of the best Woman
in the World, whom we should be sorry to
consider as yoked to a Man of no Worth
nor Honour. 
We desire therefore the good-natured and
candid Reader will be pleased to weigh attentively
the several unlucky Circumstances
which concurred so critically, that Fortune
seemed to have used her utmost Endeavours
to ensnare poor Booth's Constancy. Let
the Reader set before his Eyes a fine young 

Woman, in a manner a first Love, conferring
Obligations, and using every Art to
solten, to allure, to win, and to enflame; 
let him consider the Time and Place; let
him remember that Mr. Booth was a young
Fellow, in the highest Vigour of Life; and
lastly, let him add one single Circumstance,
that the Parties were alone together; and
then if he will not acquit the Defendant,
he must be convicted; for I have nothing
more to say in his Defence. 



The latter Part of which we expect will please
our Reader better than the former. 
A Whole Week did our Lady and Gentleman
live in this criminal Conversation,
in which the Happiness of the former
was much more perfect than that of the
latter; for tho' the Charms of Miss Mathews,
and her excessive Endearments, sometimes
lulled every Thought in the sweet
Lethargy of Pleasure; yet in the Intervals
of his Fits, his Virtue alarmed and roused
him, and brought the Image of poor injured
Amelia to haunt and torment him. 
In fact, if we regard this World only, it is
the Interest of every Man to be either perfectly 

good, or completely bad. He had
better destroy his Conscience, than gently
wound it. The many bitter Reflections
which every bad Action costs a Mind in
which there are any Remains of Goodness,
are not to be compensated by the highest
Pleasures which such an Action can produce. 
So it happened to Mr. Booth. Repentance
never failed to follow his Transgressions; 
and yet so perverse is our Judgment,
and so slippery is the Descent of Vice, when
once we are entered into it; the same Crime
which he now repented of, became a Reason
for doing that which was to cause his
future Repentance; and he continued to sin
on, because he had begun. His Repentance
however returned still heavier and
heavier, till at last it flung him into a Melancholy,
which Miss Mathews plainly
perceived, and at which she could not
avoid expressing some Resentment in obscure
Hints, and ironical Compliments on
Amelia's Superiority to her whole Sex, who
could not cloy a gay young Fellow by
many Years Possession. She would then
repeat the Compliments which others had
made to her own Beauty—and could not
forbear once crying out: ‘Upon my Soul!
my dear Billy, I believe the chief Disadvantage 

on my Side, is in my superior
Fondness; for Love, in the Minds of Men,
hath one Quality at least of a Fever,
which is to prefer Coldness in the Object. 
Confess, dear Will, is there not something
vastly refreshing in the cool Air of a
Prude’—Booth fetched a deep Sigh, and
begged her never more to mention Amelia's
Name—‘O Will,’ cries she, ‘did that
Request proceed from the Motive I could
wish, I should be the happiest of Womankind. 
—You would not sure, Madam,’ 
said Booth, ‘desire a Sacrifice,
which I must be a Villain to make to
any? Desire!’ answered she, ‘are there
any Bounds to the Desires of Love! 
Have not I been sacrificed? Hath not
my first Love been torn from my bleeding
Heart? —I claim a prior Right—As
for Sacrifices, I can make them too; and
would sacrifice the whole World at the
least Call of my Love.’ 
Here she delivered a Letter to Booth,
which she had received within an Hour,
the Contents of which were these: 


‘Dearest Madam,
Those only who truly know what Love
is, can have any Conception of the Horrors
I felt at hearing of your Confinement
at my Arrival in Town, which was this
Morning. I immediately sent my Lawyer
to enquire into the Particulars, who brought
me the agreeable News that the Man,
whose Heart's Blood ought not to be valued
at the Rate of a single Hair of yours,
is entirely out of all Danger, and that
you might be admitted to Bail. I presently
ordered him to go with two of my
Tradesmen, who are to be bound in any
Sum for your Appearance, if he should
be mean enough to prosecute you. Tho'
you may expect my Attorney with you
soon, I would not delay sending this, as I
hope the News will be agreeable to you. 
My Chariot will attend at the same time to
carry you where-ever you please. You
may easily guess what a Violence I have
done to myself in not waiting on you in
Person; but I who know your Delicacy,
feared it might offend, and that you
might think me ungenerous enough to
hope from your Distresses that Happiness,
which I am resolved to owe to your
free Gift alone, when your Good-nature 

shall induce you to bestow on me what
no Man living can merit. I beg you will
pardon all the Contents of this hasty Letter,
and do me the Honour of believing
me, 
‘Dearest Madam,
Your most passionate Admirer,
and most obedient humble Servant,
DAMON.’ 
Booth thought he had somewhere before
seen the same Hand; but in his present
Hurry of Spirits could not recollect whose
it was; nor did the Lady give him any
Time for Reflection: for he had scarce read
the Letter when she produced a little Bit of
Paper, and cried out, ‘here, Sir, here are
the Contents which he fears will offend
me.’ She then put a Bank-Bill of 100l.
into Mr. Booth's Hands, and asked him
with a Smile, if he did not think she had Reason
to be offended with so much Insolence. 
Before Booth could return any Answer
the Governor arrived and introduced Mr. Rogers
the Attorney, who acquainted the Lady
that he had brought her Discharge from her
Confinement, and that a Chariot waited at 

the Door to attend her where-ever she
pleased. 
She received the Discharge from Mr. Rogers,
and said she was very much obliged
to the Gentleman who employed him,
but that she would not make use of the
Chariot, as she had no Notion of leaving
that wretched Place in a triumphant Manner; 
in which Resolution when the Attorney
found her obstinate, he withdrew, as
did the Governor with many Bows, and as
many Ladyships. 
They were no sooner gone, than Booth
asked the Lady why she would refuse the Chariot
of a Gentleman who had behaved with
such excessive Respect. She looked earnestly
upon him, and cry'd, ‘How unkind is
that Question! Do you imagine I would
go and leave you in such a Situation? 
Thou knowest but little of Calista. Why
do you think I would accept this hundred
Pound from a Man I dislike, unless that
it was to be serviceable to the Man I love? 
I insist on your taking it as your own, and
using whatever you want of it.’ 
Booth protested in the solemnest Manner,
that he would not touch a Shilling of it, 

saying, he had already received too many
Obligations at her Hands, and more than
ever he should be able, he feared, to repay. 
‘How unkind,’ answered she, ‘is every
Word you say? Why will you mention
Obligations? Love never confers any. 
It doth every thing for its own sake. I
am not therefore obliged to the Man
whose Passion makes him generous: for
I feel how inconsiderable the whole World
would appear to me, if I could throw it
after my Heart.’ 
Much more of this Kind past, she still
pressing the Bank-note upon him, and he
as absolutely refusing, 'till Booth left the
Lady to dress herself, and went to walk in
the Area of the Prison. 
Miss Mathews now applied to the Governor
to know by what Means she might procure
the Captain his Liberty. The Governor
answered, ‘as he cannot get Bail, it
will be a difficult Matter; and Money to
be sure there must be: for People no
doubt expect to touch on these Occasions. 
When Prisoners have not wherewithal
as the Law requires to entitle themselves
to Justice, why they must be beholden
to other People, to give them their 

Liberty; and People will not to be sure
suffer others to be beholden to them for
nothing, whereof there is good Reason:
for how should we all live if it was not for
these things!’ —‘Well, well,’ said she, ‘and
how much will it cost.’ —‘How much!’ 
answered he,—‘How much!—why, let
me see.’ —Here he hesitated some time,
and then answered, ‘that for five Guineas he
would undertake to procure the Captain
his Discharge.’ That being the Sum which
he computed to remain in the Lady's Pocket; 
for as to the Gentleman's, he had long been
acquainted with the Emptiness of it. 
Miss Mathews, to whom Money was as
Dirt, (indeed she may be thought not to
have known the Value of it) delivered him
the Bank-Bill, and bid him get it changed:
for if the whole, says she, will procure him
his Liberty, he shall have it this Evening. 
‘The whole, Madam,’ answered the Governor,
as soon as he had recovered his
Breath: for it almost forsook him at the
Sight of the black Word Hundred. ‘No,
no. —There might be People indeed—but
I am not one of those. A hundred! no,
nor nothing like it. —As for myself, as I
said, I will be content with five Guineas, 

and I am sure that's little enough. What
other People will expect, I can't exactly
say. —To be sure his Worship's Clerk
will expect to touch pretty handsomely; 
as for his Worship himself he never touches
any thing, that is, not to speak of; but
then the Constable will expect something,
and the Watchmen must have something,
and the Lawyers on both Sides they must
have their Fees for finishing.’ —‘Well,’ 
said she, ‘I leave all to you. If it costs me
20l. I will have him discharged this Afternoon. 
—But you must give his Discharge
into my Hands, without letting
the Captain know any thing of the Matter.’ 
The Governor promised to obey her Commands
in every Particular; nay, he was so
very industrious, that tho' Dinner was just
then coming upon the Table, at her earnest
Request, he set out immediately on the
Purpose, and went, as he said, in Pursuit
of the Lawyer. 
All the other Company assembled at Table
as usual, where poor Booth was the
only Person out of Spirits. This was imputed
by all present to a wrong Cause; nay,
Miss Mathews herself either could not, or
would not, suspect that there was any thing 

deeper than the Despair of being speedily
discharged, that lay heavy on his Mind. 
However, the Mirth of the rest, and a
pretty liberal Quantity of Punch, which he
swallowed after Dinner (for Miss Mathews
had ordered a very large Bowl at her own
Expence, to entertain the good Company
at her Farewell) so far exhilarated his Spirits,
that when the young Lady and he retired
to their Tea, he had all the Marks of
Gayety in his Countenance, and his Eyes
sparkled with good Humour. 
The Gentleman and Lady had spent about
two Hours in Tea and Conversation, when
the Governor returned, and privately delivered
to the Lady the Discharge for her
Friend, and the Sum of eighty-two Pounds
five Shillings; the rest having been, he
said, disbursed in the Business, of which he
was ready at any Time to render an exact
Account. 
Miss Mathews being again alone with
Mr. Booth, she put the Discharge into his
Hands, desiring him to ask her no Questions; 
and adding, ‘I think, Sir, we have neither
of us now any thing more to do at this
Place.’ She then summoned the Governor, 

and ordered a Bill of that Day's
Expence, for long Scores were not usual
there; and at the same time ordered a
Hackney Coach, without having yet determined
whither she would go, but fully determined
she was wherever she went, to take
Mr. Booth with her. 
The Governor was now approaching with
a long Roll of Paper, when a faint Voice
was heard to cry out hastily, where is he?— 
and presently a female Spectre, all pale and
breathless, rushed into the Room, and fell
into Mr. Booth's Arms, where she immediately
fainted away. 
Booth made a shift to support his lovely
Burthen; tho' he was himself in a Condition
very little different from hers. Miss
Mathews likewise, who presently recollected
the Face of Amelia, was struck motionless
with the Surprize; nay, the Governor
himself, tho' not easily moved at
Sights of Horrour, stood aghast, and neither
offered to speak nor stir. 
Happily for Amelia, the Governess of the
Mansions had out of Curiosity followed
her into the Room, and was the only useful
Person present on this Occasion; she immediately 

called for Water, and ran to the
Lady's Assistance, fell to loosening her
Stays, and performed all the Offices proper
at such a Season; which had so good an
Effect, that Amelia soon recovered the Disorder
which the violent Agitation of her
Spirits had caused, and found herself alive
and awake in her Husband's Arms. 
Some tender Caresses, and a soft Whisper
or two past privately between Booth and
his Lady; nor was it without great Difficulty,
that poor Amelia put some Restraint
on her Fondness, in a Place so improper
for a tender Interview. She now cast her
Eyes round the Room, and fixing them on
Miss Mathews, who stood like a Statue; 
she soon recollected her, and addressing her
by her Name, said, ‘sure, Madam, I cannot
be mistaken in those Features; tho'
meeting you here might almost make
me suspect my Memory.’ 
Miss Mathews's Face was now all covered
with Scarlet. The Reader may easily believe
she was on no account pleased with Amelia's
Presence; indeed, she expected from her
some of those Insults, of which virtuous
Women are generally so liberal to a frail 

Sister; but she was mistaken, Amelia was
not one, 

Who thought the Nation ne'er would thrive,
‘Till all the Whores were burnt alive.
Her Virtue could support itself with its own
intrinsic Worth, without borrowing any Assistance
from the Vices of other Women; 
and she considered their natural Infirmities
as the Objects of Pity, not of Contempt or
Abhorrence. 
When Amelia therefore perceived the visible
Confusion in Miss Mathews, she presently
called to Remembrance some Stories
which she had imperfectly heard; for as
she was not naturally attentive to Scandal,
and had kept very little Company since her
Return to England, she was far from being
a Mistrels of the Lady's whole History. 
However she had heard enough to impute
her Confusion to the right Cause; she advanced
to her, and told her she was extremely
sorry to meet her in such a Place, but
hoped that no very great Misfortune was
the Occasion of it. 
Miss Mathews began, by degrees, to recover
her Spirits. She answered with a reserved 

Air, ‘I am much obliged to you,
Madam, for your Concern; we are all
liable to Misfortunes in this World. Indeed
I know not why I should be much
ashamed of being in any Place where I
am in such good Company.’ 
Here Booth interposed. He had before
acquainted Amelia in a Whisper, that his
Confinement was at an end. ‘The unfortunate
Accident, my Dear,’ said he,
‘which brought this young Lady to this
melancholy Place, is entirely determined; 
and she is now as absolutely at her Liberty
as myself.’ 
Amelia imputing the extreme Coldness
and Reserve of the Lady to the Cause already
mentioned, advanced still more and
more in proportion as she drew back; till
the Governor, who had withdrawn some
time, returned, and acquainted Miss Mathews
that her Coach was at the Door; 
upon which the Company soon separated. 
Amelia and Booth went together in Amelia's
Coach, and poor Miss Mathews was obliged
to retire alone, after having satisfied the
Demands of the Governor, which in one
Day only had amounted to a pretty considerable
Sum: for he with great Dexterity 

proportioned his Bills to the Abilities of his
Guests. 
It may seem perhaps wonderful to some
Readers, that Miss Mathews should have
maintained that cold Reserve towards Amelia,
so as barely to keep within the Rules of Civility,
instead to embracing an Opportunity
which seemed to offer, of gaining some
Degree of Intimacy with a Wife, whose
Husband she was so fond of; but besides
that her Spirits were entirely disconcerted
by so sudden and unexpected a Disappointment; 
and besides the extreme Horrors
which she conceived at the Presence of her
Rival, there is, I believe, something so outrageously
suspicious in the Nature of all
Vice, especially when joined with any great
Degree of Pride, that the Eyes of those
whom we imagine privy to our Failings, are
intolerable to us, and we are apt to aggravate
their Opinions to our Disadvantage far
beyond the Reality. 




Containing wise Observations of the Author,
and other Matters. 
There is nothing more difficult than
to lay down any fixed and certain
Rules for Happiness; or indeed to judge
with any Precision of the Happiness of
others, from the Knowledge of external
Circumstances. There is sometimes a little
Speck of Black in the brightest and gayest
Colours of Fortune, which contaminates
and deadens the whole. On the contrary,
when all without looks dark and dismal,
there is often a secret Ray of Light within
the Mind, which turns every thing to real
Joy and Gladness. 
I have in the Course of my Life seen
many Occasions to make this Observation; 
and Mr. Booth was at present very pregnant
Instance of its Truth. He was just
delivered from a Prison, and in the Possession
of his beloved Wife and Children; and
(which might be imagined greatly to augment
his Joy) Fortune had done all this
for him within an Hour, without giving
him the least Warning or reasonable Expectation 

of this strange Reverse in his Circumstances; 
and yet it is certain, that there
were very few Men in the World, more
seriously miserable than he was at this Instant. 
A deep Melancholy seized his Mind,
and cold damp Sweats over-spread his Person,
so that he was scarce animated; and
poor Amelia, instead of a fond warm Husband,
bestowed her Caresses on a dull lifeless
Lump of Clay. He endeavoured however
at first, as much as possible, to conceal
what he felt, and attempted what is
the hardest of all Talks, to act the Part of
a happy Man; but he found no Supply of
Spirits to carry on this Deceit, and would
have probably sunk under his Attempt,
had not poor Amelia's Simplicity helped
him to another Fallacy, in which he had
much better Success. 
This worthy Woman very plainly perceived
the Disorder in her Husband's Mind; 
and having no Doubt of the Cause of it,
especially when she saw the Tears stand in
his Eyes at the Sight of his Children, threw
her Arms round his Neck, and embracing
him with rapturous Fondness, cried out,
‘my dear Billy, let nothing make you uneasy. 
Heaven will, I doubt not, provide
for us and these poor Babes. Great Fortunes 

are not necessary to Happiness. 
For my own Part, I can level my Mind
with any State; and for those poor little
Things, whatever Condition of Life we
breed them to, that will be sufficient to
maintain them in. How many Thousands
abound in Affluence, whose Fortunes
are much lower than ours! for it is
not from Nature, but from Education
and Habit, that our Wants are chiefly
derived. Make yourself easy therefore,
my dear Love; for you have a Wife
who will think herself happy with you,
and endeavour to make you so in any
Situation. Fear nothing, Billy, Industry
will always provide us a wholesome Meal; 
and I will take care, that Neatness and
Cheerfulness shall make it a pleasant one.’ 
Booth presently took the Cue, which
she had given him. He fixed his Eyes on
her for a Minute, with great Earnestness
and inexpressible Tenderness; and then
cried, ‘O my Amelia, how much are you
my Superior in every Perfection! How
wife, how great, how noble are your
Sentiments! Why can I not imitate what
I so much admire? Why can I not look
with your Constancy, on those dear little
Pledges of our Loves. All my Philosophy 

is baffled with the Thought, that my
Amelia's Children are to struggle with a
cruel hard unfeeling World, and to buffet
those Waves of Fortune, which have
overwhelmed their Father—Here I own
I want your Firmness, and am not without
an Excuse for wanting it; for am I
not the cruel Cause of all your Wretchedness? 
Have I not stept between you and
Fortune, and been the cursed Obstacle to
all your Greatness and Happiness.’ 
‘Say not so, my Love, answered she. 
Great I might have been, but never happy
with any other Man. Indeed, dear Billy,
I laugh at the Fears you formerly raised
in me; what seemed so terrible at a Distance,
now it approaches nearer, appears
to have been a mere Bugbear—and let
this comfort you, that I look on myself
at this Day as the happiest of Women; 
nor have I done any thing which I do not
rejoice in, and would, if I had the Gift
of Prescience, do again.’ 
Booth was so overcome with this Behaviour,
that he had no Words to answer. 
To say the Truth, it was difficult to find
any worthy of the Occasion. He threw
himself prostrate at her Feet, whence poor 

Amelia was forced to use all her Strength as
well as Entreaties to raise, and place him in
his Chair. 
Such is ever the Fortitude of perfect Innocence,
and such the Depression of Guilt
in Minds not utterly abandoned. Booth
was naturally of a sanguine Temper; nor
would any such Apprehensions as he mentioned
have been sufficient to have restrained
his Joy, at meeting with his Amelia. In
fact, a Reflection on the Injury he had done
her was the sole Cause of his Grief. This
it was that enervated his Heart, and threw
him into Agonies, which all that Profusion
of heroic Tenderness that the most excellent
of Women intended for his Comfort,
served only to heighten and aggravate; as
the more she rose in his Admiration, the
more she quickened his Sense of his own
Unworthiness. 
After a disagreeable Evening, the first of
that Kind that he had ever past with his
Amelia, in which he had the utmost Difficulty
to force a little Cheerfulness, and in
which her Spirits were at length over-powered
by discerning the Oppression on this, they
retired to Rest, or rather to Misery, which
need not be described. 

The next Morning at Breakfast, Booth
began to recover a little from his Melancholy,
and to taste the Company of his
Children. He now first thought of enquiring
of Amelia, by what Means she had discovered
the Place of his Confinement. Amelia,
after gently rebuking him for not having
himself acquainted her with it, informed
him, that it was known all over the Country,
and that she had traced the Original
of it to her Sister; who had spread the
News with a malicious Joy, and added a
Circumstance, which would have frightned
her to Death, had not her Knowledge of
him made her give little Credit to it, which
was, that he was committed for Murder. 
But tho' she had discredited this Part, she
said, the not hearing from him during several
successive Posts made her too apprehensive
of the rest. That she got a Conveyance
therefore for herself and Children
to Salisbury; from whence the Stage-Coach
had brought them to Town, and having
deposited the Children at his Lodging, of
which he had sent her an Account on his first
Arrival in Town, she took a Hack, and
came directly to the Prison where she heard
he was, and where she found him. 

Booth excused himself, and with Truth
as to his not having writ: For in fact, he
had writ twice from the Prison, tho' he had
mentioned nothing of his Confinement; but
as he sent away his Letters after Nine at
Night, the Fellow, to whom they were
entrusted, had burnt them both for the Sake
of putting the two Pence in his own Pocket,
or rather in the Pocket of the Keeper of
the next Gin-Shop. 
As to the Account which Amelia gave
him, it served rather to raise than to satisfy
his Curiosity. He began to suspect, that
some Person had seen both him and Miss
Mathews together in the Prison, and had
confounded her Case with his; and this the
Circumstance of Murder made the more
probable. But who this Person should be,
he could not guess. After giving himself
therefore some Pains in forming Conjectures
to no Purpose, he was forced to rest contented
with his Ignorance of the real Truth. 
Two or three Days now past without
producing any thing remarkable; unless it
were, that Booth more and more recovered
his Spirits, and had now almost regained
his former Degree of Cheerfulness, when 

the following Letter arrived again to torment
him. 

‘Dear Billy,
To convince you I am the most reasonable
of Women, I have given you up
three whole Days to the unmolested Possession
of my fortunate Rival; I can refrain
no longer from letting you know
that I lodge in Dean-Street, not far from
the Church, at the Sign of the Pelican
and Trumpet; where I expect this Evening
to see you—Believe me, I am with
more Affection than any other Woman
in the World can be, 
‘My dear Billy,
Your affectionate, fond, doating
F. Mathews.’ 
Booth tore the Letter with Rage, and
threw it into the Fire; resolving never to
visit the Lady more, unless it was to pay
her the Money she had lent him, which he
was determined to do the very first Opportunity:
for it was not at present in his
Power. 

This Letter threw him back into his Fit
of Dejection, in which he had not continued
long, when a Packet from the Country
brought him the following from his Friend
Dr. Harrison. 

‘Sir,
Lyons, January 21. N. S.
Tho' I am now on my Return home,
I have taken up my Pen to communicate
to you some News I have heard from
England, which gives me much Uneasiness,
and concerning which I can indeed deliver
my Sentiments with much more Ease
this way than any other. In my Answer to
your last I very freely gave you my Opinion,
in which it was my Misfortune to
disapprove of every Step you had taken; 
but those were all pardonable Errors. Can
you be so partial to yourself, upon cool
and sober Reflexion, to think what I am
going to mention so, when you hear it? 
I promise you, it appears to me a Folly
of so monstrous a Kind, that had I heard
it from any but a Person of the highest
Honour, I should have rejected it as utterly
incredible. I hope you already guess
what I am about to name; since Heaven
forbid your Conduct should afford you
any Choice of such gross Instances of 

Weakness. In a word then you have set
up an Equipage. What shall I invent in
your Excuse, either to others, or to myself? 
In truth, I can find no Excuse for
you, and what is more, I am certain you
can find none for yourself. I must deal
therefore very plainly and sincerely with
you. Vanity is always contemptible; but
when joined with Dishonesty, it becomes
odious and detestable. At whose Expence
are you to support this Equipage? Is it
not entirely at the Expence of others; and
will it not finally end in that of your poor
Wife and Children? You know you are
two Years in Arrears to me. If I could
impute this to any extraordinary or common
Accident, I think I should never
have mentioned it; but I will not suffer
my Money to support the ridiculous, and
I must say, criminal Vanity of any one. 
I expect therefore to find at my Return,
that you have either discharged my whole
Debt, or your Equipage. Let me beg
you seriously to consider your Circumstances
and Condition in Life, and to remember
that your Situation will not justify any
the least unnecessary Expence. Simply to
be poor, says my favourite Greek Historian,
was not held scandalous by the wise Athenians,
but highly so, to owe that Poverty to 

our own Indiscretion. Present my Affections
to Mrs. Booth, and be assured,
that I shall not without great Reason, and
great Pain too, ever cease to be, 
‘Your most faithful Friend,
R. Harrison.’ 
Had this Letter come at any other time,
it would have given Booth the most sensible
Affliction; but so totally had the Affair
of Miss Mathews possessed his Mind, that
like a Man in a most raging Fit of the
Gout, he was scarce capable of any additional
Torture; nay, he even made a use of
this latter Epistle, as it served to account to
Amelia for that Concern which he really felt
on another Account. The poor deceived
Lady therefore applied herself to give him
Comfort where he least wanted it. She said
he might easily perceive that the Matter
had been misrepresented to the Doctor, who
would not, she was sure, retain the least
Anger against him when he knew the real
Truth. 
After a short Conversation on this Subject,
in which Booth appeared to be greatly
consoled by the Arguments of his Wife,
they parted. He went to take a Walk in 

the Park, and she remained at home to prepare
him his Dinner. 
He was no sooner departed than his little
Boy, not quite six Years old, said to Amelia,
‘La! Mamma, what is the Matter with
poor Papa, what makes him look so as if he
was going to cry? He is not half so merry
as he used to be in the Country.’ Amelia
answered, ‘Oh! my dear! your Papa is only
a little thoughtful, he will be merry again
soon.’ —Then looking fondly on her Children,
she burst into an Agony of Tears,
and cried, ‘Oh Heavens! what have these
poor little Infants done? why will the barbarous
World endeavour to starve them,
by depriving us of our only Friend? — 
O my dear, your Father is ruined, and
we are undone.’ —The Children presently
accompanied their Mother's Tears, and the
Daughter cried—‘Why, will any body hurt
poor Papa? Hath he done any harm to
any body?’ —‘No, my dear Child,’ 
said the Mother, ‘he is the best Man in
the World, and therefore they hate him.’ 
Upon which the Boy, who was extremely
sensible at his Years, answered, ‘Nay,
Mamma, how can that be? Have not you
often told me, that if I was good, every
body would love me?’ ‘All good People 

will,’ answered she. ‘Why don't
they love Papa then?’ replied the Child,
‘for I am sure he is very good.’ ‘So they
do, my dear,’ said the Mother, ‘but there
are more bad People in the World, and
they will hate you for your Goodness.’ 
‘Why then bad People,’ cries the Child,
‘are loved by more than the Good’—‘No
Matter for that, my Dear,’ said she, ‘the
Love of one good Person is more worth
having, than that of a thousand wicked
ones; nay, if there was no such Person
in the World, still you must be a good
Boy: for there is one in Heaven who will
love you; and his Love is better for you
than that of all Mankind.’ 
This little Dialogue we are apprehensive
will be read with Contempt by many; indeed
we should not have thought it worth
recording, was it not for the excellent Example
which Amelia here gives to all Mothers. 
This admirable Woman never let a
Day pass, without instructing her Children
in some Lesson of Religion and Morality. 
By which Means, she had in their tender
Minds so strongly annexed the Ideas of
Fear and Shame to every Idea of Evil of
which they were susceptible, that it must
require great Pains and Length of Habit to 

separate them. Tho' she was the tenderest
of Mothers, she never suffered any Symptom
of Malevolence to shew itself in their most
trifling Actions without Discouragement,
without Rebuke; and if it broke forth
with any Rancour, without Punishment. 
In which she had such Success, that not
the least Marks of Pride, Envy, Malice,
or Spite discovered itself in any of their
little Words or Deeds. 



In which Amelia appears in no unamiable
Light. 
Amelia, with the Assistance of a little
Girl, who was their only Servant, had
drest her Dinner; and she had likewise
drest herself as neat as any Lady who had
a regular Set of Servants could have done; 
when Booth returned, and brought with
him his Friend James, whom he had met
with in the Park; and who, as Booth absolutely
refused to dine away from his Wife,
to whom he had promised to return, had
invited himself to dine with him. Amelia
had none of that paultry Pride, which possesses
so many of her Sex, and which disconcerts
their Tempers, and gives them 

the Air and Looks of Furies, if their Husbands
bring in an unexpected Guest, without
giving them timely Warning to provide
a Sacrifice to their own Vanity. Amelia
received her Husband's Friend with the utmost
Complaisance and good Humour: 
She made indeed some Apology for the
Homeliness of her Dinner; but it was politely
turned as a Compliment to Mr. James's
Friendship, which could carry him where
he was sure of being so ill entertained; and
gave not the least Hint how magnificently
she would have provided, had she expected
the Favour of so much good Company. A
Phrase which is generally meant to contain
not only an Apology for the Lady of the
House, but a tacit Satir on her Guests
for their Intrusion, and is at least a strong
Insinuation that they are not welcome. 
Amelia failed not to enquire very earnestly
after her old Friend Mrs. James, formerly
Miss Bath, and was very sorry to find that
she was not in Town. The Truth was, as
James had married out of a violent Liking
of, or Appetite to her Person, Possession
had surfeited him, and he was now grown
so heartily tired of his Wife, that she had
very little of his Company; she was forced
therefore to content herself with being the 

Mistress of a large House and Equipage in
the Country, ten Months in the Year by
herself. The other two he indulged her
with the Diversions of the Town; but
then, tho' they lodged under the same
Roof, she had little more of her Husband's
Society, than if they had been 100 Miles
a-part. With all this, as she was a Woman
of calm Passions, she made herself
contented; for she had never had any violent
Affection for James; the Match was
of the prudent Kind, and to her Advantage:
for his Fortune, by the Death of an
Uncle, was become very considerable; and
she had gained every thing by the Bargain
but a Husband, which her Constitution suffered
her to be very well satisfied without. 
When Amelia after Dinner retired to her
Children, James began to talk to his
Friend concerning his Affairs. He advised
Booth very earnestly to think of getting
again into the Army, in which he himself
had met with such Success, that he had obtained
the Command of a Regiment, to
which his Brother-in-Law was Lieutenant-Colonel. 
These Preferments they both
owed to the Favour of Fortune only: for
tho' there was no Objection to either of
their military Characters; yet neither of 

them had any extraordinary Desert; and if
Merit in the Service was a sufficient Recommendation,
Booth, who had been twice
wounded in the Siege, seemed to have the
fairest Pretensions; but he remained a poor
half-pay Lieutenant, and the others were,
as we have said, one of them a Lieutenant-Colonel,
and the other had a Regiment. 
Such Rises we often see in Life, without
being able to give any satisfactory Account
of the Means, and therefore ascribe them
to the good Fortune of the Person. 
Both Colonel James and his Brother-in-Law
were Members of Parliament: for as
the Uncle of the former had left him together
with his Estate, an almost certain Interest
in a Borough, so he chose to confer
this Favour on Colonel Bath; a Circumstance
which would have been highly immaterial
to mention here; but as it serves
to set forth the Goodness of James, who
endeavoured to make up in Kindness to the
Family, what he wanted in Fondness for
his Wife. 
Col. James then endeavoured all in his
Power to persuade Booth to think again of
a military Life, and very kindly offered
him his Interest towards obtaining him a 

Company in the Regiment under his Command. 
Booth must have been a Madman in
his present Circumstances to have hesitated
one Moment at accepting such an Offer, and
he well knew Amelia, notwithstanding her
Aversion to the Army, was much too wise to
make the least Scruple of giving her Consent. 
Nor was he, as it appeared afterwards, mistaken
in his Opinion of his Wife's Understanding:
for she made not the least Objection
when it was communicated to her, but
contented herself with an express Stipulation,
that wherever he was commanded to go (for
the Regiment was now abroad) she would
accompany him. 
Booth therefore accepted his Friend's
Proposal with a Profusion of Acknowledgments; 
and, it was agreed, that Booth
should draw up a Memorial of his Pretensions,
which Col. James undertook to present
to some Man of Power, and to back
it with all the Force he was able. 
Nor did the Friendship of the Colonel
stop here. ‘You will excuse me, dear
Booth,’ said he, ‘if after what you have
told me (for he had been very explicite
in revealing his Affairs to him) ‘I suspect
you must want Money at this Time. If that 

be the Case, as I am certain it must be,
I have fifty Pieces at your Service.’ This
Generosity brought the Tears into Booth's
Eyes; and he at length confest, that he had
not five Guineas in the House; upon which
James gave him a Bank-bill for 20l. and
said he would give him thirty more the next
Time he saw him. 
Thus did this generous Colonel (for generous
he really was to the highest Degree)
restore Peace and Comfort to this little Family; 
and by this Act of Beneficence make
two of the worthiest People, two of the
happiest that Evening. 
Here Reader give me leave to stop a minute,
to lament that so few are to be found
of this benign Disposition; that while Wantonness,
Vanity, Avarice and Ambition are
every Day rioting and triumphing in the
Follies and Weakness, the Ruin and Desolation
of Mankind, scarce one Man in a
thousand is capable of tasting the Happiness
of others. Nay, give me leave to
wonder that Pride, which is constantly struggling,
and often imposing on itself to gain
some little Pre-eminence, should so seldom
hint to us the only certain as well as laudable
way of setting ourselves above another 

Man, and that is by becoming his Benefactor. 



Containing an Eulogium upon Innocence, and
other grave Matters. 
Booth past that Evening, and all the
succeeding Day with his Amelia, without
the Interruption of almost a single
Thought concerning Miss Mathews, after
having determined to go on the Sunday,
the only Day he could venture without the
Verge in the present State of his Affairs,
and pay her what she had advanced for him
in the Prison. But she had not so long
Patience; for the third Day, while he was
sitting with Amelia, a Letter was brought
to him. As he knew the Hand, he immediately
put it in his Pocket unopened, not
without such an Alteration in his Countenance,
that had Amilia, who was then playing
with one of the Children, cast her Eyes
towards him, she must have remarked it. 
This Accident however luckily gave him
Time to recover himself: for Amelia was
so deeply engaged with the little one, that
she did not even remark the Delivery of
the Letter. The Maid soon after returned 

into the Room, saying the Chairman desired
to know if there was any Answer to the
Letter—‘What Letter,’ cries Booth. — 
‘The Letter I gave you just now,’ answered
the Girl. —‘Sure,’ cries Booth, ‘the
Child is mad, you gave me no Letter.’ — 
‘Yes, indeed I did, Sir,’ said the poor
Girl. ‘Why then, as sure as Fate,’ cries
Booth, ‘I threw it into the Fire in my Revereè,
why, Child, why did you not tell
me it was a Letter? Bid the Chairman
come up—stay, I will go down myself; 
for he will otherwise dirt the Stairs with
his Feet.’ 
Amelia was gently chiding the Girl for her
Carelessness, when Booth returned, saying,
it was very true that she had delivered him
a Letter from Col. James, and that perhaps
it might be of Consequence. ‘However,’ 
says he, ‘I will step to the Coffee-house,
and send him an Account of this strange
Accident, which I know he will pardon in
my present Situation.’ 
Booth was overjoyed at this Escape which
poor Amelia's total Want of all Jealousy and
Suspicion, made it very easy for him to
accomplish: but his Pleasure was considerably
abated, when upon opening the Letter, 

he found it to contain, mixed with several
very strong Expressions of Love, some
pretty warm ones of the upbraiding Kind; 
but what most alarmed him was a Hint,
that it was in her Power (Miss Mathews's)
Power, to make Amelia as miserable as herself. 
Besides the general Knowledge of 

—Furens quid Fœmina possit,
he had more particular Reasons to apprehend
the Rage of a Lady, who had given
so strong an Instance how far she could carry
her Revenge. She had already sent a
Chairman to his Lodgings, with a positive
Command not to return without an Answer
to her Letter. This might of itself have
possibly occasioned a Discovery; and he
thought he had great Reason to fear, that
if she did not carry Matters so far as purposely
and avowedly to reveal the Secret to
Amelia, her Indiscretion would at least effect
the Discovery of that which he would at any
Price have concealed. Under these Terrours
he might, I believe, be considered as the
most wretched of human Beings. 
O Innocence, how glorious and happy a
Portion art thou to the Breast that possesses
thee! Thou fearest neither the Eyes nor the 

Tongues of Men. Truth, the most powerful
of all things, is thy strongest Friend; 
and the brighter the Light is in which thou
art displayed, the more it discovers thy
transcendent Beauties. Guilt, on the contrary,
like a base Thief, suspects every Eye
that beholds him to be privy to his Transgressions,
and every Tongue that mentions
his Name to be proclaiming them. Fraud
and Falshood are his weak and treacherous
Allies; and he lurks trembling in the Dark,
dreading every Ray of Light, lest it should
discover him, and give him up to Shame
and Punishment. 
While Booth was walking in the Park
with all these Horrors in his Mind, he again
met his Friend Col. James, who soon took
notice of that deep Concern which the other
was incapable of hiding. After some little
Conversation, Booth said, ‘my dear Colonel,
I am sure I must be the most insensible
of Men, if I did not look on you as the
best and the truest Friend; I will therefore
without Scruple repose a Confidence
in you of the highest Kind. I have often
made you privy to my Necessities, I will
now acquaint you with my Shame, provided
you have Leisure enough to give
me a Hearing: for I must open to you a 

long History, since I will not reveal my
Fault, without informing you, at the
same time, of those Circumstances, which,
I hope, will in some measure excuse it.’ 
The Colonel very readily agreed to give
his Friend a patient Hearing. So they walked
directly to a Coffee-house at the Corner of
Spring-Garden, where being in a Room by
themselves, Booth opened his whole Heart,
and acquainted the Colonel with his Amour
with Miss Mathews from the very Beginning,
to his receiving that Letter which had
caused all his present Uneasiness, and which
he now delivered into his Friend's Hand. 
The Colonel read the Letter very attentively
twice over: (he was silent indeed
long enough to have read it oftener) and
then turning to Booth said, ‘Well, Sir; 
and is it so grievous a Calamity to be the
Object of a young Lady's Affection; 
especially of one whom you allow to be
so extremely handsome?’ ‘Nay, but my
dear Friend,’ cries Booth, ‘do not jest
with me; you who know my Amelia.’ 
‘Well, my dear Friend,’ answered James,
‘and you know Amelia, and this Lady too
—But what would you have me do for
you.’ ‘I would have you give me your 

Advice,’ says Booth, ‘by what Method
I shall get rid of this dreadful Woman
without a Discovery.’ ‘And do you
really,’ cries the other, ‘desire to get rid
of her.’ ‘Can you doubt it,’ said Booth,
‘after what I have communicated to you,
and after what you yourself have seen in
my Family? for I hope, notwithstanding
this fatal Slip, I do not appear to you in
the Light of a Profligate.’ ‘Well,’ answered
James, and whatever Light I may
appear to you in, if you are really tired
of the Lady, and if she be really what
you have represented her, I'll endeavour
to take her off your Hands; but I insist
upon it, that you do not deceive me in
any Particular.’ Booth protested in the
most solemn manner that every Word which
he had spoken was strictly true; and being
asked whether he would give his Honour
never more to visit the Lady, he assured
James that he never would. He then, at
his Friend's Request, delivered him Miss
Mathews's Letter, in which was a second
Direction to her Lodgings, and declared to
him, that if he could bring him safely out
of this terrible Affair, he should think himself
to have a still higher Obligation to his
Friendship, than any which he had already
received from it. 

Booth pressed the Colonel to go home
with him to Dinner, but he excused himself,
being, as he said, already engaged. 
However, he undertook in the Afternoon to
do all in his Power, that Booth should receive
no more Alarms from the Quarter of Miss
Mathews, whom the Colonel undertook to
pay all the Demands she had on his Friend. 
They then separated. The Colonel went
to Dinner at the King's Arms, and Booth
returned in high Spirits to meet his Amelia. 
The next Day early in the Morning, the
Colonel came to the Coffee-house, and sent
for his Friend, who lodged but at a little
Distance. The Colonel told him he had
a little exaggerated the Lady's Beauty; 
however, he said, he excused that; ‘for you
might think perhaps,’ cries he, ‘that
your Inconstancy to the finest Woman in
the World, might want some Excuse. 
Be that as it will,’ said he, ‘you may
make yourself easy, as it will be, I am
convinced, your own Fault, if you have
ever any further Molestation from Miss
Mathews.’ 
Booth poured forth very warmly a great
Profusion of Gratitude on this Occasion; 

and nothing more any-wife material past at
this Interview, which was very short, the
Colonel being in a great Hurry, as he had,
he said, some Business of very great Importance
to transact that Morning. 
The Colonel had now seen Booth twice,
without remembring to give him the thirty
Pound. This the latter imputed intirely to
Forgetfulness; for he had always found
the Promises of the former to be equal in
Value with the Notes or Bonds of other
People. He was more surprized at what
happened the next Day, when meeting his
Friend in the Park, he received only a cold
Salute from him; and tho' he past him
five or six times, and the Colonel was walking
with a single Officer of no great Rank,
and with whom he seemed in no earnest
Conversation; yet could not Booth, who
was alone, obtain any further Notice from
him. 
This gave the poor Man some Alarm; 
tho' he could scarce persuade himself there
was any Design in all this Coldness or Forgetfulness. 
Once he imagined that he had
lessened himself in the Colonel's Opinion,
by having discovered his Inconstancy to
Amelia; but the known Character of the 

other, presently cured him of this Suspicion,
for he was a perfect Libertine with regard
to Women; that being indeed the principal
Blemish in his Character, which otherwise
might have deserved much Commendation
for Good-nature, Generosity, and
Friendship. But he carried this one to a
most unpardonable Height; and made no
Scruple of openly declaring, that if he ever
liked a Woman well enough to be uneasy
on her account, he would cure himself, if
he could, by enjoying her, whatever might
be the Consequence. 
Booth could not therefore be persuaded
that the Colonel would so highly resent in
another a Fault, of which he was himself
most notoriously guilty. After much Consideration,
he could derive this Behaviour
from nothing better than a Capriciousness
in his Friend's Temper, from a kind of
Inconstancy of Mind, which makes Men
grow weary of their Friends, with no more
Reason than they often are of their Mistresses. 
To say the Truth, there are Jilts
in Friendship as well as in Love; and by
the Behaviour of some Men in both, one
would almost imagine that they industriously
sought to gain the Affections of other, 

with a View only of making the Parties
miserable. 
This was the Consequence of the Colonel's
Behaviour to Booth. Former Calamities
had afflicted him; but this almost distracted
him; and the more so, as he was
not able well to account for such Conduct,
nor to conceive the Reason of it. 
Amelia at his Return, presently perceived
the Disturbance in his Mind, tho' he endeavoured
with his utmost Power to hide
it; and he was at length prevailed upon
by her Entreaties to discover to her the
Cause of it; which she no sooner heard,
than she applied as judicious a Remedy to
his disordered Spirits, as either of those great
mental Physicians, Tully or Aristotle, could
have thought of. She used many Arguments
to persuade him that he was in an
Error; and had mistaken Forgetfulness and
Carelessness for a design'd Neglect. 
But as this Physic was only eventually
good, and as its Efficacy depended on her
being in the right, a Point in which she
was not apt to be too positive; she thought
fit to add some Consolation of a more certain
and positive kind. ‘Admit,’ said she, 

‘my Dear, that Mr. James should prove
the unaccountable Person you have suspected,
and should, without being able
to alledge any Cause, withdraw his Friendship
from you, (for surely the Accident
of burning his Letter is too trifling and
ridiculous to mention) why should this
grieve you? The Obligations he hath
confer'd on you, I allow, ought to make
his Misfortunes almost your own; but
they should not, I think, make you see
his Faults so very sensibly, especially
when by one of the greatest Faults in the
World committed against yourself, he
hath considerably lessened all Obligations: 
For sure, if the same Person who hath
contributed to my Happiness at one time,
doth every thing in his Power maliciously
and wantonly to make me miserable at
another, I am very little obliged to such
a Person. And let it be a Comfort to
my dear Billy, that however other Friends
may prove false and fickle to him, he
hath one Friend, whom no Inconstancy
of her own, nor any Change of his Fortune,
nor Time, nor Age, nor Sickness,
nor any Accident can ever alter; 
but who will esteem, will love, and doat
on him for ever.’ So saying, she flung
her snowy Arms about his Neck, and gave 

him a Caress so tender, that it seemed almost
to balance all the Malice of his Fate. 
And, indeed, the Behaviour of Amelia
would have made him completely happy,
in defiance of all adverse Circumstances,
had it not been for those bitter Ingredients
which he himself had thrown into his Cup; 
and which prevented him from truly relishing
his Amelia's Sweetness, by cruelly reminding
him how unworthy he was of this
excellent Creature. 
Booth did not long remain in the dark
as to the Conduct of James, which at first
appeared to him to be so great a Mystery; 
for this very Afternoon he received a Letter
from Miss Mathews, which unravelled
the whole Affair. By this Letter, which
was full of Bitterness and Upbraiding, he
discovered that James was his Rival with
that Lady, and was indeed the identical
Person who had sent the 100l. Note to Miss
Mathews, when in the Prison. He had
Reason to believe likewise, as well by the
Letter as by other Circumstances, that
James had hitherto been an unsuccessful
Lover: for the Lady, tho' she had forfeited
all Title to Virtue, had not yet so
far forfeited all Pretensions to Delicacy, a 

to be, like the Dirt in the Street, indifferently
common to all. She distributed her Favours
only to those she liked, in which
Number that Gentleman had not the Happiness
of being included. 
When Booth had made this Discovery,
he was not so little versed in human Nature,
as any longer to hesitate at the true Motive
to the Colonel's Conduct; for he well knew
how odious a Sight a happy Rival is to an
unfortunate Lover. I believe he was in
reality glad to assign the cold Treatment
he had received from his Friend, to a Cause
which, however injustifiable, is at the same
time highly natural; and to acquit him of
a Levity, Fickleness, and Caprice, which
he must have been unwillingly obliged to
have seen in a much worse Light. 
He now resolved to take the first Opportunity
of accosting the Colonel, and of
coming to a perfect Explanation upon the
whole Matter. He debated likewise with
himself, whether he should not throw himself
at Amelia's Feet, and confess a Crime
to her, which he found so little Hopes of
concealing, and which he foresaw would
occasion him so many Difficulties and Terrors
to endeavour to conceal. Happy had 

it been for him, had he wisely pursued this
Step; since in great Probability he would
have received immediate Forgiveness from
that best of Women; but he had not sufficient
Resolution; or to speak, perhaps,
more truly, he had too much Pride to confess
his Guilt, and preferred the Danger of
the highest Inconveniences to the Certainty
of being put to the Blush. 



In which may appear that Violence is sometimes
done to the Name of Love. 
When that happy Day came, in
which unhallowed Hands are forbidden
to contaminate the Shoulders of the
unfortunate, Booth went early to the Colonel's
House, and being admitted to his Presence,
began with great Freedom, though with
great Gentleness, to complain of his not
having dealt with him with more Openness. 
‘Why, my dear Colonel,’ said he, ‘would
you not acquaint me with that Secret which
this Letter hath disclosed?’ James read the
Letter, at which his Countenance changed
more than once, and then after a short Silence,
said, ‘Mr. Booth, I have been to
blame, I own it; and you upbraid me 

with Justice. The true Reason was, that
I was ashamed of my own Folly. D&wblank;n
me, Booth, if I have not been a most consummate
Fool, a very Dupe to this Woman; 
and she hath a particular Pleasure in
making me so. I know what the Impertinence
of Virtue is, and I can submit to
it; but to be treated thus by a Whore. 
You must forgive me, dear Booth; but your
Success was a Kind of Triumph over me
which I could not bear. I own I have not
the least Reason to conceive any Anger against
you; and yet, curse me, if I should not
have been less displeased at your lying with
my own Wife; nay I could almost have
parted with half my Fortune to you more
willingly, than have suffered you to receive
that Trifle of my Money, which
you received at her Hands. However,
I ask your Pardon, and I promise you, I
will never more think of you with the
least Ill-will, on the account of this Woman; 
but as for her, d&wblank;n me, if I do
not enjoy her by some means or other,
whatever it costs me; for I am already
above 200l. out of Pocket, without having
scarce had a Smile in return.’ 
Booth exprest much Astonishment at this
Declaration; he said, he could not conceive 

how it was possible to have such an Affection
for a Woman, who did not shew the
least Inclination to return it. —James gave
her a hearty Curse; and said, ‘Pox of her
Inclination; I want only the Possession of
her Person; and that you will allow is a
very fine one. But, besides my Passion
for her, she hath now piqued my Pride; 
for how can a Man of my Fortune brook
being refused by a Whore?’ ‘Since you
are so set on the Business,’ cries Booth; 
‘you will excuse my saying so; I fancy you
had better change your Method of applying
to her: for, as she is perhaps the vainest
Woman upon Earth, your Bounty may
probably do you little Service, nay, may
rather actually disoblige her. Vanity is
plainly her predominant Passion, and, if
you will administer to that, it will infallibly
throw her into your Arms. To this I
attribute my own unfortunate Success. 
While she relieved my Wants and Distresses,
she was daily feeding her own
Vanity; whereas as every Gift of yours
asserted your Superiority, it rather offended
than pleaded her. Indeed Women generally
love to be of the obliging Side; 
and if we examine their Favourites, we
shall find them to be much oftner such as 

they have conferred Obligations on, than
such as they have received them from.’ 
There was something in this Speech which
pleased the Colonel; and he said with a Smile,
‘I don't know how it is, Will; but you
know Women better than I.’ ‘Perhaps
Colonel,’ answered Booth, ‘I have studied
their Minds more.’ ‘I don't however
much envy you your Knowledge,’ reply'd
the other: ‘for I never think their Minds
worth considering. However, I hope I
shall profit a little by your Experience
with Miss Mathews. Damnation seize the
proud insolent Harlot! The Devil take
me if I don't love her more than I ever
loved a Woman!’ 
The Rest of their Conversation turned on
Booth's Affairs. The Colonel again reassumed
the Part of a Friend, gave him the
Remainder of the Money, and promised to
take the first Opportunity of laying his
Memorial before a great Man. 
Booth was greatly overjoyed at this Success. 
Nothing now lay on his Mind, but
to conceal his Frailty from Amelia, to whom
he was afraid Miss Mathews in the Rage
of her Resentment would communicate it. 

This Apprehension made him stay almost
constantly at home; and he trembled at
every Knock at the Door. His Fear moreover
betrayed him into a Meanness, which he
would have heartily despised on any other
Occasion. This was to order the Maid to
deliver him any Letter directed to Amelia,
at the same time strictly charging her not
to acquaint her Mistress with her having
received any such Orders. 
A Servant of any Acuteness would have
formed strange Conjectures from such an
Injunction; but this poor Girl was of perfect
Simplicity; so great indeed was her
Simplicity, that had not Amelia been void
of all Suspicion of her Husband, the Maid
would have soon after betrayed her Master. 
One Afternoon while they were drinking
Tea, little Betty, so was the Maid called,
came into the Room; and calling her Master
forth, delivered him a Card which was directed
to Amelia. Booth having read the
Card, on his Return into the Room, chid
the Girl for calling him, saying, if you
can read, Child, you must see it was directed
to your Mistress. —To this the Girl
answered pertly enough. I am sure, Sir,
you ordered me to bring every Letter first 

to you. This Hint with many Women
would have been sufficient to have blown
up the whole Affair; but Amelia who heard
what the Girl said, through the Medium of
Love and Confidence, saw the Matter in a
much better Light than it deserved; and looking
tenderly on her Husband, said, ‘Indeed,
my Love, I must blame you for a Conduct,
which perhaps I ought rather to
praise, as it proceeds only from the extreme
Tenderness of your Affection. But
why will you endeavour to keep any Secrets
from me? Believe me, for my own
sake you ought not: for as you cannot
hide the Consequences, you make me always
suspect ten times worse than the
Reality. While I have you and my Children
well before my Eyes, I am capable of
facing any News which can arrive: for
what ill News can come (unless indeed it
concerns my little Babe in the Country)
which doth not relate to the Badness of
our Circumstances? and those, I thank
Heaven, we have now a fair Prospect of
retrieving. Besides, dear Billy, though
my Understanding be much inferiour to
yours, I have sometimes had the Happiness
of luckily hitting on some Argument
which hath afforded you Comfort. This
you know, my dear, was the Case with 

regard to Col. James, whom I persuaded
you to think you had mistaken, and you
see the Event proved me in the right.’ 
So happily, both for herself and Mr. Booth,
did the Excellence of this good Woman's
Disposition deceive her, and force her to see
every thing in the most advantageous Light
to her Husband. 
The Card being now inspected was found
to contain the Compliments of Mrs. James
to Mrs. Booth, with an Account of her being
arrived in Town, and having brought with her
a very great Cold. Amelia was overjoyed at
the News of her Arrival; and having drest
herself in the utmost Hurry, left her Children
to the Care of her Husband, and ran away
to pay her Respects to her Friend, whom she
loved with a most sincere Affection. But
how was she disappointed, when eager with
the utmost Impatience, and exulting with
the Thoughts of presently seeing her beloved
Friend, she was answered at the Door that
the Lady was not at home? nor could she,
upon telling her Name, obtain any Admission. 
This, considering the Account she
had received of the Lady's Cold, greatly
surprized her; and she returned home very
much vexed at her Disappointment. 

Amelia, who had no Suspicion that Mrs.
James was really at home, and, as the Phrase
is, was denied, would have made a second
Visit the next Morning, had she not been
prevented by a Cold, which she herself now
got, and which was attended with a slight
Fever. This confined her several Days to
her House, during which Booth officiated
as her Nurse, and never stirred from her. 
In all this Time she heard not a Word
from Mrs. James, which gave her some Uneasiness,
but more Astonishment. The
tenth Day when she was perfectly recovered,
about nine in the Evening, when she and
her Husband were just going to Supper,
she heard a most violent Thundering at the
Door, and presently after a Rustling of Silk
upon her Stair-Case, at the same time a female
Voice cried out pretty loud—‘Bless me!
what am I to climb up another Pair of Stairs?’ 
Upon which, Amelia, who well knew the
Voice, presently ran to the Door, and ushered
in Mrs. James most splendidly drest; 
who put on as formal a Countenance, and
made as formal a Courtesie to her old
Friend, as if she had been her very distant
Acquaintance. 

Poor Amelia, who was going to rush into
her Friend's Arms, was struck motionless
by this Behaviour; but recollecting her Spirits,
as she had an excellent Presence of
Mind, she presently understood what the
Lady meant, and resolved to treat her in her
own way. Down therefore the Company sat,
and Silence prevailed for some time, during
which Mrs. James surveyed the Room with
more Attention than she would have bestowed
on one much finer. At length the
Conversation began, in which the Weather
and the Diversions of the Town, were well
canvassed. Amelia, who was a Woman of
great Humour, performed her Part to Admiration; 
so that a By-stander would have
doubted, in every other Article than Dress,
which of the two was the most accomplished
fine Lady. 
After a Visit of twenty Minutes, during
which not a Word of any former Occurrences
was mentioned, nor indeed any Subject
of Discourse started, except only those
two above-mentioned, Mrs. James rose from
her Chair, and retired in the same formal
Manner in which she had approached. We
will pursue her, for the sake of the Contrast,
during the rest of the Evening. She went from 

Amelia directly to a Rout, where she spent
two Hours in a Croud of Company, talked
again and again over the Diversions and
News of the Town, played two Rubbers
at Whiske, and then retired to her own
Apartment, where having past another Hour
in undressing herself, she went to Bed by
herself. 
Booth and his Wife, the Moment their
Companion was gone, sat down to Supper
on a Piece of cold Meat, the Remains of
their Dinner. After which, over a Pint of
Wine, they entertained themselves for a
while with the ridiculous Behaviour of their
Visitant. But Amelia declaring she rather
saw her as the Object of Pity than Anger,
turned the Discourse to pleasanter Topics. 
The little Actions of their Children, the
former Scenes, and future Prospects of their
Life, furnished them with many pleasant
Ideas, and the Contemplation of Amelia's. 
Recovery threw Booth into Raptures. At
length they retired, and with mutual Desires,
and equal Warmth, flew into each
other's Arms. 
It is possible some Readers may be no less
surprized at the Behaviour of Mrs. James,
than was Amelia herself, since they may 

have perhaps received so favourable an Impression
of that Lady from the Account given
of her by Mr. Booth, that her present Demeanour
may seem unnatural and inconsistent
with her former Character. But they
will be pleased to consider the great Alteration
in her Circumstances, from a State of
Dependency on a Brother, who was himself
no better than a Soldier of Fortune, to that
of being Wife to a Man of a very large
Estate, and considerable Rank in Life. 
And what was her present Behaviour more
than that of a fine Lady, who considered
Form and Show as essential Ingredients of
human Happiness, and imagined all Friendship
to consist in Ceremony, Curt'sies, Messages
and Visits? In which Opinion she
hath the Honour of the Concurrence of
much the larger Part of one Sex, and no
small Number of the other. 




Containing a very extraordinary and pleasant
Incident. 
The next Evening Booth and Amelia
went to walk in the Park with their
Children. They were now on the Verge
of the Parade, and Booth was describing to
his Wife the several Buildings round it; 
when on a sudden Amelia missing her little
Boy cried out, where's little Billy; upon
which Booth casting his Eyes over the
Grass saw a Foot-Soldier shaking the Boy
at a little Distance. At this Sight, without
making any Answer to his Wife, he leapt
over the Rails; and running directly up to
the Fellow, who had a Firelock with a
Bayonet fixed in his Hand, he seized him
by the Collar, and tript up his Heels, and
at the same time wrested his Arms from
him. A Serjeant upon Duty seeing the
Affray at some Distance ran presently up,
and being told what had happened, gave
the Centinel a hearty Curse, and told him
he deserved to be hanged. A By-stander
gave this Information; for Booth was returned
with his little Boy to meet Amelia, who
staggered towards him as fast as she could, 

all pale and breathless, and scarce able to
support her tottering Limbs. The Serjeant
now came up to Booth, to make an Apology
for the Behaviour of the Soldier, when
of a sudden he turned almost as pale as
Amelia herself. He stood silent whilst Booth
was employed in comforting and recovering
his Wife; and then addressing himself to
him, said, ‘bless me! Lieutenant, could
I imagine it had been your Honour; 
and was it my little Master that the Rascal
used so—I am glad I did not know
it, for I should certainly have run my
Halbert into him.’ 
Booth presently recognized his old faithful
Servant Atkinson, and gave him a hearty
Greeting; saying he was very glad to see
him in his present Situation. ‘Whatever
I am,’ answered the Serjeant, ‘I shall
always think I owe it to your Honour.’ 
Then taking the little Boy by the Hand—he
cried, ‘what a vast fine young Gentleman
Master is grown!’ and cursing the Soldier's
Inhumanity swore heartily he would
make him pay for it. 
As Amelia was much disordered with her
Fright, she did not recollect her Foster-Brother,
till he was introduced to her by 

Booth; but she no sooner knew him, than
she bestowed a most obliging Smile on him; 
and calling him by the Name of honest Joe
said she was heartily glad to see him in
England. —‘See, my Dear, cries Booth,
what Preferment your old Friend is come
to. You would scarce know him, I believe,
in his present State of Finery.’ 
‘I am very well pleased to see it,’ answered
Amelia, ‘and I wish him Joy of being
made an Officer, with all my Heart.’ 
In fact, from what Mr. Booth said, joined
to the Serjeant's laced Coat, she believed
that he had obtained a Commission. So
weak and absurd is human Vanity, that
this Mistake of Amelia's possibly put poor
Atkinson out of Countenance; for he looked
at this Instant more silly than he had ever
done in his Life; and making her a most
respectful Bow muttered something about
Obligations, in a scarce articulate or intelligible
manner. 
The Serjeant had indeed among many
other Qualities, that Modesty which a Latin
Author honours by the Name of ingenuous: 
Nature had given him this, notwithstanding
the Meanness of his Birth; and six Years Conversation
in the Army, had not taken it away. 
To say the Truth, he was a noble Fellow; and 

Amelia by supposing he had a Commission
in the Guards had been guilty of no Affront
to that honourable Body. 
Booth had a real Affection for Atkinson,
tho' in fact he knew not half his Merit. 
He acquainted him with his Lodgings,
where he earnestly desired to see him. 
Amelia, who was far from being recovered
from the Terrors into which the seeing her
Husband engaged with the Soldier had thrown
her, desired to go home; nor was she well able
to walk without some Assistance. While she
supported herself therefore on her Husband's
Arm, she told Atkinson, she should be obliged
to him, if he would take care of the
Children. He readily accepted the Office; 
but upon offering his Hand to Miss, she
refused, and burst into Tears. Upon which
the tender Mother resigned Booth to her
Children, and put herself under the Serjeant's
Protection; who conducted her safe
home, tho' she often declared she feared
she should drop down by the way. The
Fear of which so affected the Serjeant, (for
besides the Honour which he himself had
for the Lady, he knew how tenderly his
Friend loved her) that he was unable to
speak; and had not his Nerves been so 

strongly braced that nothing could shake
them, he had enough in his Mind to have
set him a trembling equally with the Lady. 
When they arrived at the Lodgings, the
Mistress of the House opened the Door,
who, seeing Amelia's Condition, threw open
the Parlour, and begged her to walk in; 
upon which she immediately slung herself
into a Chair; and all present thought she
would have fainted away—However she
escaped that Misery, and having drank a
Glass of Water with a little white Wine
mixed in it, she began in a little time to
regain her Complexion, and at length assured
Booth that she was perfectly recovered; 
but declared she had never undergone so
much, and earnestly begged him never to
be so rash for the future. She then called
her little Boy, and gently chid him; saying,
‘you must never do so more,
Billy; you see what Mischief you might
have brought upon your Father; and
what you have made me suffer.’ ‘La!
Mamma,’ said the Child, ‘what Harm
did I do? I did not know that People
might not walk in the green Fields in
London. I am sure if I did a Fault, the
Man punished me enough for it; for he
pinched me almost through my slender 

Arm.’ He then bared his little Arm,
which was greatly discoloured by the Injury
it had received—Booth uttered a most dreadful
Execration at this Sight; and the Serjeant,
who was now present, did the like. 
Atkinson now returned to his Guard, and
went directly to the Officer to acquaint him
with the Soldier's Inhumanity; but he who
was about fifteen Years of Age, gave the
Serjeant a great Curse, and said the Soldier
had done very well; for that idle Boys ought
to be corrected. This however did not
satisfy poor Atkinson, who the next Day,
as soon as the Guard was relieved, beat the
Fellow most unmercifully, and told him he
would remember him as long as he stayed
in the Regiment. 
Thus ended this trifling Adventure, which
some Readers will perhaps be pleased with
seeing related at full Length. None, I
think, can fail drawing one Observation
from it; namely, how capable the most insignificant
Accident is of disturbing human
Happiness, and of producing the most unexpected
and dreadful Events. A Reflection
which may serve to many moral and religious
Uses. 

This Accident produced the first Acquaintance
between the Mistress of the
House, and her Lodgers; for hitherto they
had scarce exchanged a Word together. 
But the great Concern which the good
Woman had shewn on Amelia's account at
this Time, was not likely to pass unobserved,
or unthanked either by the Husband
or Wife. Amelia therefore, as soon as she
was able to go up Stairs, invited Mrs. Ellison
(for that was her Name) to her Apartment,
and desired the Favour of her to stay
to Supper. She readily complied; and they
past a very agreeable Evening together, in
which the two Women seemed to have
conceived a most extraordinary Liking to
each other. 
Tho' Beauty in general doth not greatly
recommend one Woman to another, as it
is too apt to create Envy; yet in Cases
where this Passion doth not interfere, a fine
Woman is often a pleasing Object even to
some of her own Sex; especially when
her Beauty is attended with a certain Air of
Affability, as was that of Amelia in the
highest Degree. 

Mrs. Ellison therefore was as much charmed
with the Loveliness of her fair Lodger,
as with all her other engaging Qualities. 
She was indeed so taken with Amelia's
Beauty, that she could not refrain from
crying out in a kind of Transport of Admiration,
‘upon my Word, Captain Booth,
you are the happiest Man in the World. 
Your Lady is so extremely handsome,
that one cannot look at her without
Pleasure.’ 
This good Woman herself had none of
these attractive Charms to the Eye. Her
Person was short, and immoderately fat; 
her Features were none of the most regular; 
and her Complexion (if indeed she ever had
a good one) had considerably suffered by
Time. 
Her good Humour and Complaisance,
however, were highly pleasing to Amelia. 
Nay, why should we conceal the secret
Satisfaction which that Lady felt from the
Compliments paid to her Person? since such
of my Readers as like her best will not be
sorry to find that she was a Woman. 




Containing various Matters. 
A fortnight had now past, since Booth
had seen or heard from the Colonel; 
which did not a little surprize him, as they
had parted so good Friends, and as he had
so cordially undertaken his Cause concerning
the Memorial, on which all his Hopes
depended. 
The Uneasiness which this gave him, farther
encreased on finding that his Friend refused
to see him: for he had paid the Colonel
a Visit at Nine in the Morning, and was told
he was not stirring; and at his Return back
an Hour afterwards, the Servant said his
Master was gone out; of which Booth was
certain of the Falsehood: for he had, during
that whole Hour, walked backwards and
forwards within Sight of the Colonel's Door,
and must have seen him, if he had gone out
within that Time. 
The good Colonel however did not long
suffer his Friend to continue in the deplorable
State of Anxiety; for the very next
Morning Booth received his Memorial inclosed 

in a Letter, acquainting him that
Mr. James had mentioned his Affair to the
Person he proposed; but that the great Man
had so many Engagements on his Hands,
that it was impossible for him to make any
further Promises at this Time. 
The cold and distant Stile of this Letter,
and indeed the whole Behaviour of James,
so different from what it had been formerly,
had something so mysterious in it, that it
greatly puzzled and perplexed poor Booth; 
and it was so long before he was able to
solve it, that the Reader's Curiosity will
perhaps be obliged to us for not leaving
him so long in the dark as to this Matter. 
The true Reason then of the Colonel's Conduct
was this: His unbounded Generosity,
together with the unbounded Extravagance,
and consequently the great Necessity of Miss
Mathews, had at length overcome the
Cruelty of that Lady, with whom he likewise
had luckily no Rival. Above all,
the Desire of being revenged on Booth,
with whom she was to the highest Degree
enraged, had perhaps contributed not a little
to his Success: for she had no sooner
condescended to a Familiarity with her
new Lover, and discovered that Captain
James, of whom she had heard so much 

from Booth, was no other than the identical
Colonel, than she employed every Art of
which she was Mistress, to make an utter
Breach of Friendship between these two. 
For this Purpose she did not scruple to insinuate,
that the Colonel was not at all obliged
to the Character given of him by his
Friend; and to the Account of this latter
she placed most of the Cruelty which she
had shewn to the former. 
Had the Colonel made a proper Use
of his Reason, and fairly examined the
Probability of the Fact, he could scarce
have been imposed upon to believe a Matter
so inconsistent with all he knew of Booth,
and in which that Gentleman must have
sinned against all the Laws of Honour without
any visible Temptation. But in solemn
fact, the Colonel was so intoxicated with
his Love, that it was in the Power of his
Mistress to have persuaded him of any
thing; besides, he had an Interest in giving
her Credit: for he was not a little pleased
with finding a Reason for hating the Man,
whom he could not help hating without any
Reason, at least, without any which he
durst fairly assign even to himself. Henceforth
therefore he abandoned all Friendship
for Booth, and was more inclined to put him 

out of the World, than to endeavour any
longer at supporting him in it. 
Booth communicated this Letter to his
Wife, who endeavoured, as usual, to the
utmost of her Power to console him under
one of the greatest Afflictions which, I
think, can befal a Man, namely, the Unkindness
of a Friend; but he had luckily
at the same time the greatest Blessing in his
Possession, the Kindness of a faithful and beloved
Wife. A Blessing however, which
tho' it compensates most of the Evils of
Life, rather serves to aggravate the Misfortune
of distress'd Circumstances, from the
Consideration of the Share which she is to
bear in them. 
This Afternoon Amelia received a second
Visit from Mrs. Ellison, who acquainted
her that she had a Present of a Ticket for
the Oratorio, which would carry two Persons
into the Gallery; and therefore begged
the Favour of her Company thither. 
Amelia with many Thanks acknowledged
the Civility of Mrs. Ellison; but declined
accepting her Offer; upon which Booth very
strenuously insisted on her going, and said
to her, ‘my Dear, if you knew the Satisfaction 

I have in any of your Pleasures. 
I am convinced you would not refuse the
Favour Mrs. Ellison is so kind to offer
you; for as you are a Lover of Music,
you, who have never been at an Oratorio,
cannot conceive how you will be delighted.’ 
‘I well know your Goodness,
my Dear,’ answered Amelia, ‘but I cannot
think of leaving my Children without
some Person more proper to take care of
them than this poor Girl.’ Mrs. Ellison
removed this Objection, by offering her
own Servant, a very discreet Matron, to
attend them; but notwithstanding this, and
all she could say with the Assistance of
Booth, and of the Children themselves,
Amelia still persisted in her Refusal; and
the Mistress of the House, who knew how
far good Breeding allows Persons to be pressing
on these Occasions, took her Leave. 
She was no sooner departed, than Amelia
looking tenderly on her Husband said,
‘how can you, my dear Creature, think
that Music hath any Charms for me at
this Time—Or indeed do you believe that
I am capable of any Sensation worthy the
Name of Pleasure, when neither you nor
my Children are present, or bear any
part of it?’ 

An Officer of the Regiment to which
Booth had formerly belonged, hearing from
Atkinson where he lodged, now came to
pay him a Visit. He told him that several
of their old Acquaintance were to meet the
next Wednesday at a Tavern, and very
strongly pressed him to be one of the Company. 
Booth was in truth what is called a
hearty Fellow, and loved now and then to
take a chearful Glass with his Friends; but
he excused himself at this Time. His
Friend declared he would take no Denial,
and he growing very importunate, Amelia
at length seconded him. Upon this Booth
answered, ‘well, my Dear, since you desire
me, I will comply, but on one Condition,
that you go at the same time to
the Oratorio.’ Amelia thought this Request
reasonable enough, and gave her
Consent; of which Mrs. Ellison presently
received the News, and with great Satisfaction. 
It may perhaps be asked why Booth could
go to the Tavern, and not to the Oratorio
with his Wife. In truth then, the Tavern
was within hallowed Ground, that is to say,
in the Verge of the Court: for of five
Officers that were to meet there, three besides 

Booth were confined to that Air, which
hath been always found extremely wholesome
to a broken military Constitution. And
here if the good Reader will pardon the
Pun, he will scarce be offended at the Observation; 
since how is it possible that without
running in Debt, any Persons should
maintain the Dress and Appearance of a
Gentleman, whose Income is not half so
good as that of a Porter? It is true, that
this Allowance, small as it is, is a great
Expence to the Public; but if several more
unnecessary Charges were spared, the Public
might perhaps bear a little Encrease of this
without much feeling it. They would not. 
I am sure, have equal Reason to complain
at contributing to the Maintenance of a Set
of brave Fellows, who, at the Hazard of
their Health, their Limbs and their Lives,
have maintained the Safety and Honour
of their Country; as when they find themselves
taxed to the Support of a Set of
Drones, who have not the least Merit or
Claim to their Favour; and who, without
contributing in any manner to the Good of
the Hive, lie luxuriously on the Labours
of the industrious Bee. 




In which Amelia, with her Friend, goes
to the Oratorio. 
Nothing happened between the
Monday and the Wednesday worthy a
Place in this History. Upon the Evening of
the latter the two Ladies went to the Oratorio,
and were there time enough to get a
first Row in the Galery. Indeed there was
only one Person in the House when they
came: for Amelia's Inclinations, when she
gave a Loose to them, were pretty eager for
this Diversion, she being a great Lover of
Music, and particularly of Mr. Handel's Compositions. 
Mrs. Ellison was, I suppose, a
great Lover likewise of Music, for she was
the more impatient of the two; which
was rather the more extraordinary, as these
Entertainments were not such Novelties to
her as they were to poor Amelia. 
Tho' our Ladies arrived full two Hours
before they saw the Back of Mr. Handel; 
yet this Time of Expectation did not hang
extremely heavy on their Hands; for besides
their own Chat, they had the Company
of the Gentleman, whom they found at 

their first Arrival in the Galery; and who,
though plainly, or rather roughly dressed,
very luckily for the Women happened to
be not only well-bred, but a Person of very
lively Conversation. The Gentleman on his
part seemed highly charmed with Amelia,
and in fact was so: for, though he restrained
himself entirely within the Rules of Good-Breeding,
yet was he in the highest Degree
officious to catch at every Opportunity of
shewing his Respect, and doing her little
Services. He procured her a Book and
Wax-Candle, and held the Candle for her
himself during the whole Entertainment. 
At the End of the Oratorio, he declared
he would not leave the Ladies till he had
seen them safe into their Chairs or Coach; 
and at the same time very earnestly entreated
that he might have the Honour of waiting
on them. Upon which Mrs. Ellison,
who was a very good-humoured Woman,
answered, ‘Ay sure, Sir, if you please; 
you have been very obliging to us; and a
Dish of Tea shall be at your Service at
any time; and then told him where she
lived.’ 
The Ladies were no sooner seated in their
Hackney-coach, than Mrs. Ellison burst into 

a loud Laughter, and cried, ‘I'll be hanged,
Madam, if you have not made a Conquest
to night; and what is very pleasant,
I believe the poor Gentleman takes you
for a single Lady.’ ‘Nay,’ answered
Amelia very gravely, ‘I protest I began to
think at last he was rather too particular,
though he did not venture at a Word that
I could be offended at; but if you fancy
any such thing, I am sorry you invited
him to drink Tea.’ ‘Why so?’ replied
Mrs. Ellison, ‘Are you angry with a Man
for liking you? If you are, you will be
angry with almost every Man that sees
you. If I was a Man myself, I declare
I should be in the Number of your Admirers. 
Poor Gentleman, I pity him heartily; 
he little knows that you have not a
Heart to dispose of. For my own part, I
should not be surprized at seeing a serious
Proposal of Marriage: for I am convinced
he is a Man of Fortune, not only by the
Politeness of his Address, but by the Fineness
of his Linen, and that valuable Diamond-Ring
on his Finger. But you will
see more of him when he comes to Tea.’ 
‘Indeed I shall not,’ answered Amelia, ‘tho'
I believe you only rally me; I hope you
have a better Opinion of me, than to think
I would go willingly into the Company of 

a Man, who had an improper Liking for
me.’ Mrs. Ellison, who was one of the
gayest Women in the World, repeated the
Words, improper Liking, with a Laugh; 
and cried, ‘My dear Mrs. Booth, believe
me, you are too handsome and too good-humour'd
for a Prude. How can you affect
being offended at what I am convinced
is the greatest Pleasure of Womankind,
and chiefly I believe of us virtuous
Women? for I assure you, notwithstanding
my Gaiety, I am as virtuous as
any Prude in Europe.’ ‘Far be it from
me, Madam,’ said Amelia, ‘to suspect
the contrary of abundance of Women,
who indulge themselves in much greater
Freedoms than I should take, or have
any Pleasure in taking: for I solemnly
protest, if I know my own Heart, the
liking of all Men, but of one, is a Matter
quite indifferent to me, or rather would
be highly disagreeable.’ 
This Discourse brought them home, where
Amelia finding her Children asleep, and her
Husband not returned, invited her Companion
to partake of her homely Fare, and
down they sat to Supper together. The
Clock struck twelve; and no News being
arrived of Booth, Mrs. Ellison began to express 

some Astonishment at his Stay, whence
she launched into a general Reflexion on
Husbands, and soon past to some particular
Invectives on her own. ‘Ah, my dear
Madam,’ says she, ‘I know the present
State of your Mind by what I have myself
often felt formerly. I am no Stranger
to the melancholy Tone of a midnight
Clock. It was my Misfortune to drag
on a heavy Chain above fifteen Years with
a sottish Yoke-fellow. But how can I
wonder at my Fate; since I see even your
superiour Charms can't confine a Husband
from the bewitching Pleasures of a Bottle.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ says Amelia, ‘I have
no Reason to complain, Mr. Booth is one
of the soberest of Men; but now and
then to spend a late Hour with his Friend,
is, I think, highly excusable.’ ‘O, no
doubt,’ cries Mrs. Ellison, ‘if he can excuse
himself; but if I was a Man.’ —Here
Booth came in and interrupted the Discourse. 
Amelia's Eyes flashed with Joy the Moment
he appeared; and he discovered no less
Pleasure in seeing her. His Spirits were indeed
a little elevated with Wine, so as to
heighten his Good-humour, without in the
least disordering his Understanding, and
made him such delightful Company, that
though it was past one in the Morning, 

neither his Wife, nor Mrs. Ellison, thought
of their Beds during a whole Hour. 
Early the next Morning the Serjeant came
to Mr. Booth's Lodgings, and with a melancholy
Countenance acquainted him, that
he had been the Night before at an Alehouse,
where he heard one Mr. Murphy
an Attorney declare, that he would get a
Warrant backed against one Capt. Booth at
the next Board of Green-Cloth. ‘I hope,
Sir,’ said he, ‘your Honour will pardon
me; but by what he said, I was afraid he
meant your Honour; and therefore I
thought it my Duty to tell you; for I knew
the same thing happen to a Gentleman
here t'other Day.’ 
Booth gave Mr. Atkinson many Thanks
for his Information. ‘I doubt not,’ said
he, ‘but I am the Person meant; for it
would be foolish in me to deny that I am
liable to Apprehensions of that sort.’ ‘I
hope, Sir,’ said the Serjeant, ‘your Honour
will soon have Reason to fear no
Man living; but in the mean time, if
any Accident should happen, my Bail is
at your Service as far as it will go; and
I am a Housekeeper, and can swear myself
worth 100l.’ Which hearty and 

friendly Declaration received all those Acknowledgments
from Booth, which it really
deserved. 
The poor Gentleman was greatly alarmed
at this News; but he was altogether as
much surprized at Murphy's being the Attorney
employed against him, as all his
Debts, except only to Capt. James, arose
in the Country, where he did not know
that Mr. Murphy had any Acquaintance. 
However, he made no doubt that he was
the Person intended, and resolved to remain
a close Prisoner in his own Lodgings, 'till he
saw the Event of a Proposal which had been
made him the Evening before at the Tavern,
where an honest Gentleman, who had
a Post under the Government, and who was
one of the Company, had promised to serve
him with the Secretary at War, telling him,
that he made no doubt of procuring him
whole Pay in a Regiment abroad, which in
his present Circumstances was very highly
worth his Acceptance; when indeed that,
and a Goal, seemed to be the only Alternatives
that offered themselves to his Choice. 
Mr. Booth and his Lady spent that Afternoon
with Mrs. Ellison. An Incident
which we should scarce have mentioned, had 

it not been that Amelia gave, on this Occasion,
an Instance of that Prudence which
can never be too circumspect in married
Women of Delicacy: for before she would
consent to drink Tea with Mrs. Ellison, she
made Conditions, that the Gentleman who
had met them at the Oratorio should not be
let in. Indeed this Circumspection proved
unnecessary in the present Instance; for no
such Visitor ever came; a Circumstance
which gave great Content to Amelia: for
that Lady had been a little uneasy at the
Raillery of Mrs. Ellison, and had upon Reflexion
magnified every little Compliment
made her, and every little Civility shewn her
by the unknown Gentleman, far beyond the
Truth. These Imaginations, now all subsided
again; and she imputed all that Mrs.
Ellison had said, either to Raillery or Mistake. 
A young Lady made a fourth with them
at Whisk, and likewise stayed the whole
Evening. Her Name was Bennet. She
was about the Age of five and twenty; 
but Sickness had given her an older Look,
and had a good deal diminished her Beauty; 
of which, young as she was, she plainly
appeared to have only the Remains in her
present Possession. She was in one particular 

the very Reverse of Mrs. Ellison, being
altogether as remarkably grave as the other
was gay. This Gravity was not however
attended with any Sourness of Temper: On
the contrary, she had much Sweetness in
her Countenance, and was perfectly well-bred. 
In short, Amelia imputed her grave
Deportment to her ill Health, and began to
entertain a Compassion for her, which in
good Minds, that is to say, in Minds capable
of Compassion, is certain to introduce
some little Degree of Love or Friendship. 
Amelia was in short so pleased with the
Conversation of this Lady, that, though a
Woman of no impertinent Curiosity, she
could not help taking the first Opportunity
of enquiring who she was. Mrs. Ellison
said, that she was unhappy Lady, who
had married a young Clergyman for Love,
who, dying of a Consumption, had left
her a Widow in very indifferent Circumstances. 
This Account made Amelia still
pity her more, and consequently added to
the Liking which she had already conceived
for her. Amelia therefore desired Mrs. Ellison
to bring her acquainted with Mistress
Bennet, and said she would go any Day with
her to make that Lady a Visit. ‘There
need be no Ceremony,’ cried Mrs. Ellison, 

‘she is a Woman of no Form: and as I
saw plainly she was extremely pleased with
Mrs. Booth, I am convinced I can bring
her to drink Tea with you any Afternoon
you please.’ 
The two next Days Booth continued at
home, highly to the Satisfaction of his Amelia,
who really knew no Happiness out of
his Company, nor scarce any Misery in it. 
She had indeed at all times so much of his
Company when in his Power, that she had no
occasion to assign any particular Reason for
his staying with her, and consequently it could
give her no Cause of Suspicion. The Saturday
one of her Children was a little disordered
with a feverish Complaint, which
confined her to her Room, and prevented
her drinking Tea in the Afternoon with her
Husband in Mrs. Ellison's Apartment, where
a noble Lord, a Cousin of Mrs. Ellison's
happened to be present: for though that
Lady was reduced in her Circumstances,
and obliged to let out Part of her House
in Lodgings, she was born of a good Family,
and had some considerable Relations. 
His Lordship was not himself in any
Office of State; but his Fortune gave him
great Authority with those who were. Mrs. 

Ellison therefore very bluntly took an Opportunity
of recommending Booth to his
Consideration. She took the first Hint
from my Lord's calling the Gentleman
Captain—To which she answered—‘Ay,
I wish your Lordship would make him
so. It would be but an Act of Justice,
and I know it is in your Power
to do much greater things.’ She then
mentioned Booth's Services, and the Wounds
he had received at the Siege, of which she
had heard a faithful Account from Amelia— 
Booth blushed, and was as silent as a young
Virgin at the hearing her own Praises. His
Lordship answered, ‘Cousin Ellison, you
know you may command my Interest; 
nay, I shall have a Pleasure in serving
one of Mr. Booth's Character: for my
part, I think Merit in all Capacities
ought to be encouraged; but I know the
Ministry are greatly pestered with Solicitations
at this time. However, Mr. Booth
may be assured I will take the first Opportunity; 
and in the mean time I shall be
glad of seeing him any Morning he
pleases.’ For all these Declarations, Booth
was not wanting in Acknowledgments to
the generous Peer, any more than he was
in secret Gratitude to the Lady, who had 

shewn so friendly and uncommon a Zeal in
his Favour. 
The Reader, when he knows the Character
of this Nobleman, may perhaps
conclude that his seeing Booth alone was a
lucky Circumstance; for he was so passionate
an Admirer of Women, that he could scarce
have escaped the Attraction of Amelia's
Beauty. And few Men, as I have observed,
have such disinterested Generosity
as to serve a Husband the better, because
they are in Love with his Wife, unless she
will condescend to pay a Price beyond the
Reach of a virtuous Woman. 
Booth's Affairs now put on a better Aspect
than they had ever worn before, and
he returned with great Pleasure to his Amelia,
to communicate to her the good News; 
which she was not at present very capable
of enjoying, as her little Girl was grown
worse, and her Fears on that account had
absorbed the whole Attention of the Mother. 