




Containing a very polite Scene. 
We will now look back to some
Personages, who, though not
the principal Characters in this
History, have yet made too considerable a
Figure in it to be abruptly dropt. And
these are Colonel James and his Lady. 
This fond Couple never met till Dinner
the Day after the Masquerade, when
they happened to be alone together in an
Antichamber before the Arrival of the rest
of the Company. 

The Conversation began with the Colonel's
saying, ‘I hope, Madam, you got
no Cold last Night at the Masquerade.’ 
To which the Lady answered by much the
same kind of Question. 
They then sat together near five Minutes
without opening their Mouths to each
other. At last Mrs. James said, ‘Pray,
Sir, who was that Masque with you in
the Dress of a Shepherdess? How could
you expose yourself by walking with
such a Trollop in public; for certainly
no Woman of any Figure would appear
there in such a Dress. You know, Mr.
James, I never interfere with your Affairs; 
but I would methinks for my own
Sake, if I was you, preserve a little
Decency in the Face of the World.’ 
‘Upon my Word,’ said James, ‘I do
not know whom you mean. A Woman
in such a Dress might speak to me for
aught I know—A thousand People
speak to me at a Masquerade. But I
promise you, I spoke to no Woman Acquaintance
there that I know of—Indeed
I now recollect there was a Woman
in a Dress of a Shepherdess; and there was 

another aukward Thing in a blue Domino
that plagued me a little, but I soon
got rid of them.’ 
‘And I suppose you do not know the
Lady in the blue Domino neither?—’ 
‘Not I, I assure you,’ said James. ‘But
pray why do you ask me these Questions? 
It looks so like Jealousy.’ 
‘Jealousy,’ cries she, ‘I jealous! No,
Mr. James, I shall never be jealous I
promise you, especially of the Lady in
the blue Domino; for to my Knowledge
she despises you of all human Race.’ 
‘I am heartily glad of it,’ said James; 
‘for I never saw such a tall aukward Monster
in my Life.’ 
‘That is a very cruel Way of telling me
you knew me.—’ 
‘You, Madam,’ said James—‘you
was in a black Domino.’ 
‘It is not so unusual a Thing, I believe,
you yourself know to change Dresses,
—I own I did it to discover some of your 

Tricks. I did not think you could
have distinguish'd the tall aukward Monster
so well.’ 
‘Upon my Soul,’ said James, ‘if it was
you, I did not even suspect it; so you
ought not to be offended at what I have
said ignorantly.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ cries she, ‘you cannot
offend me by any thing you can say to
my Face—no, by my Soul, I despise
you too much. But I wish, Mr. James,
you would not make me the Subject of
your Conversation amongst your Wenches. 
I desire I may not be afraid of meeting
them for fear of their Insults: That I
may not be told by a dirty Trollop, you
make me the Subject of your Wit amongst
them, of which it seems I am the
favourite Topic. Tho' you have married
a tall aukward Monster, Mr. James,
I think she hath a Right to be treated, as
your Wife, with Respect at least—Indeed
I shall never require any more: Indeed,
Mr. James, I never shall. —I think
a Wife hath a Title to that.’ 
‘Who told you this Madam?’ said
James. 

‘Your Slut, said she,’ ‘your Wench,
your Shepherdess.’ 
‘By all that's sacred,’ cries James, ‘I do
not know who the Shepherdess was.’ 
‘By all that's sacred then,’ says she— 
‘she told me so—and I am convinced
she told me Truth. —But I do not
wonder at your denying it; for that is
equally consistent with Honour as to behave
in such a Manner to a Wife who is
a Gentlewoman. —I hope you will allow
me that, Sir. —Because I had not quite
so great a Fortune, I hope you do not
think me beneath you, or that you did
me any Honour in marrying me. I am
come of as good a Family as yourself,
Mr. James; and if my Brother knew
how you treated me, he would not bear it.’ 
‘Do you threaten me with your Brother,
Madam,’ said James? 
‘I will not be ill treated, Sir,’ answered
she. 
‘Nor I neither, Madam,’ cries he; ‘and
therefore I desire you will prepare to go
into the Country To-morrow Morning.’ 

‘Indeed, Sir,’ said she, ‘I shall not.’ 
‘By Heavens, Madam, but you shall,’ 
answered he, ‘I will have my Coach at the
Door To-morrow Morning by seven; 
and you shall either go into it or be carried.’ 
‘I hope, Sir, you are not in earnest,’ 
said she. 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ answered he, ‘but
I am in earnest, and resolved; and into
the Country you go To-morrow.’ 
‘But why into the Country,’ said she,
‘Mr. James? Why will you be so barbarous
to deny me the Pleasures of the
Town?’ 
‘Because you interfere with my Pleasures,’ 
cried James; ‘which I have told
you long ago I would not submit to. 
It is enough for fond Couples to have
these Scenes together. I thought we had
been upon a better Footing, and had
cared too little for each other to become
mutual Plagues. I thought you had
been satisfied with the full Liberty of doing
what you please.’ 

‘So I am. I, defy you to say I have
ever given you any Uneasiness.’ 
‘How, cries he, have you not just
now upbraided me with what you heard
at the Masquerade?’ 
‘I own, said she, to be insulted by
such a Creature to my Face stung me
to the Soul. I must have had no Spirit
to bear the Insults of such an Animal. 
Nay she spoke of you with equal Contempt. 
Whoever she is, I promise
you, Mr. Booth is her Favourite. But
indeed she is unworthy any one's
Regard: for she behaved like an arrant
Dragoon.’ 
‘Hang her, cries the Colonel, I know
nothing of her.’ 
‘Well but, Mr. James—I am sure
you will not send me into the Country. 
Indeed I will not go into the Country.’ 
‘If you was a reasonable Woman, cries
James, perhaps I should not desire it. — 
And on one Consideration—’ 

‘Come name your Consideration, said
she.’ 
‘Let me first experience your Discernment,
said he—Come, Molly, let me
try your Judgment. Can you guess at
any Woman of your Acquaintance that
I like?’ 
‘Sure, said she, it cannot be Mrs.
Booth!’ 
‘And why not Mrs. Booth, answer'd
he? Is she not the finest Woman in the
World?’ 
‘Very far from it, replied she, in my
Opinion.’ 
‘Pray what Faults, said he, can you
find in her?’ 
‘In the first Place, cries Mrs. James,
her Eyes are too large; and she hath a
Look with them that I don't know how
to describe; but I know I don't like it. 
Then her Eyebrows are too large; therefore
indeed she doth all in her Power
to remedy this with her Pincers: for if 

it was not for those, her Eyebrows would
be preposterous. —Then her Neck is
too protuberant for the genteel Size, especially
as she laces herself: for no Woman
in my Opinion can be genteel who
is not entirely flat before. And lastly,
she is both too short and too tall. — 
Well, you may laugh, Mr. James, I
know what I mean, tho' I cannot well
express it. —I mean that she is too tall
for a pretty Woman, and too short for
a fine Woman. —There is such a
Thing as a Kind of insipid Medium— 
a Kind of something that is neither one
Thing or another. I know not how to
express it more clearly; but when I say
such a one is a pretty Woman, a pretty
Thing, a pretty Creature, you know
very well I mean a little Woman; and
when I say such a one is a very fine Woman,
a very fine Person of a Woman,
to be sure I must mean a tall Woman. 
Now a Woman that is between both, is
certainly neither the one nor the other.’ 
‘Well, I own,’ said he, ‘you have explain'd
yourself with great Dexterity; but
with all these Imperfections, I cannot
help liking her.’ 

‘That you need not tell me, Mr. James,
answer'd the Lady; for that I knew before
you desir'd me to invite her to your
House. And did I not nevertheless,
like an obedient Wife, comply with
your Desires? Did I make any Objection
to the Party you proposed for the
Masquerade, tho' I knew very well your
Motive? What can the best of Wives
do more? To procure you Success is
not in my Power; and if I may give
you my Opinion, I believe you never
will succeed with her.’ 
‘Is her Virtue so very impregnable,
said he, with a Sneer?’ 
‘Her Virtue, answer'd Mrs. James, hath
the best Guard in the World, which is
a most violent Love for her Husband.’ 
‘All Pretence, and Affectation, cries
the Colonel. It is impossible she should
have so little Taste, or indeed so little
Delicacy as to like such a Fellow.’ 
‘Nay I do not much like him myself,’ 
said she—‘He is not indeed at all such a
sort of Man as I should like; but I 

thought he had been generally allow'd to
be handsome.’ 
‘He handsome, cries James? What
with a Nose like the Proboscis of an
Elephant, with the Shoulders of a
Porter, and the Legs of a Chairman? 
The Fellow hath not in the least the
Look of a Gentleman; and one would
rather think he had followed the Plough
than the Camp all his Life.’ 
‘Nay now I protest, said she, I think
you do him Injustice. He is genteel
enough, in my Opinion. It is true indeed
he is not quite of the most delicate
Make; but whatever he is, I am convinced
she thinks him the finest Man in
the World.’ 
‘I cannot believe it, answer'd he peevishly. 
—But will you invite her to
Dinner here To-morrow?’ 
‘With all my Heart, and as often as
you please, answer'd she. —But I have
some Favours to ask of you. —First,
I must hear no more of going out of
Town 'till I please.’ 

‘Very well, cried he.’ 
‘In the next Place, said she, I must
have two hundred Guineas within these
two or three Days.’ 
‘Well—I agree to that too, answered
he.’ 
‘And when I do go out of Town, I
go to Tunbridge—I insist upon that; 
and from Tunbridge I go to Bath— 
positively to Bath. And I promise you
faithfully I will do all in my Power to
carry Mrs. Booth with me.’ 
‘On that Condition, answer'd he, I
promise you you shall go wherever
you please. —And to shew you, I will
even prevent your Wishes by my Generosity,
as soon as I receive the five thousand
Pounds, which I am going to take up
on one of my Estates, you shall have
two hundred more.’ 
She thanked him with a low Curtesie; 
and he was in such good Humour that he
offered to kiss her. To this Kiss she
coldly turn'd her Cheek—and then flirting 

her Fan, said—Mr. James, ‘There is
one Thing I forgot to mention to you— 
I think you intended to get a Commission
in some Regiment abroad for
this young Man. —Now if you would
take my Advice, I know this will not
oblige his Wife; and besides I am positive
she resolves to go with him. — 
But if you can provide for him in some
Regiment at home, I know she will
dearly love you for it; and when he is
order'd to Quarters, she will be left behind— 
and Yorkshire or Scotland I think
is as good a Distance as either of the
Indies.’ 
‘Well, I will do what I can, answer'd
James; but I cannot ask any Thing yet:
for I got two Places of 100l. a Year
each for two of my Footmen, within
this Fortnight.’ 
At this Instant a violent Knock at the
Door signified the Arrival of their Company; 
upon which both Husband and
Wife put on their best Looks to receive
their Guests; and from their Behaviour to
each other during the rest of the Day, a
Stranger might have concluded he had
been in Company with the fondest Couple
in the Universe. 




Matters Political. 
Before we return to Booth, we
will relate a Scene in which Dr. Harrison
was concern'd. 
This good Man whilst in the Country
happen'd to be in the Neighbourhood of
a Nobleman of his Acquaintance, and
whom he knew to have very considerable
Interest with the Ministers at that Time. 
The Doctor who was very well known
to this Nobleman, took this Opportunity
of paying him a Visit in order to recommend
poor Booth to his Favour. Nor
did he much doubt of his Success, the
Favour he was to ask being a very small
one, and to which he thought the Service
of Booth gave him so just a Title. 
The Doctor's Name soon gain'd him an
Admission to the Presence of this Great
Man, who indeed receiv'd him with much
Courtesy and Politeness; not so much
perhaps from any particular Regard to the
sacred Function, nor from any Respect to 

the Doctor's personal Merit, as from some
Considerations which the Reader will perhaps
guess anon. After many Ceremonials,
and some previous Discourse on different
Subjects, the Doctor open'd his Business,
and told the Great Man, that he was come
to him to solicit a Favour for a young
Gentleman who had been an Officer in the
Army, and was now on Half-Pay. ‘All
the Favour I ask, my Lord, said he,
is, that this Gentleman may be again
admitted ad eundem. I am convinced
your Lordship will do me the Justice
to think I would not ask for a worthless
Person; but indeed the young Man I
mean, hath very extraordinary Merit. 
He was at the Siege of Gibraltar, in
which he behav'd with distinguish'd Bravery; 
and was dangerously wounded at
two several Times in the Service of his
Country. I will add, that he is at present
in great Necessity, and hath a Wife
and several Children, for whom he hath
no other Means of providing; and if it
will recommend him further to your
Lordship's Favour, his Wife, I believe,
is one of the best and worthiest of all
her Sex.’ 

‘As to that, my dear Doctor, cries the
Nobleman, I shall make no Doubt. 
Indeed any Service I shall do the Gentleman
will be upon your Account. As
to Necessity, it is the Plea of so many,
that it is impossible to serve them all. — 
And with Regard to the Personal Merit
of these inferior Officers, I believe, I
need not tell you that is very little regarded. 
But if you recommend him,
let the Person be what he will, I am
convinced it will be done: for I know
it is in your Power at present to ask for
a greater Matter than this.’ 
‘I depend entirely upon your Lordship,
answer'd the Doctor.’ 
‘Indeed, my worthy Friend, replied
the Lord, I will not take a Merit to
myself, which will so little belong to
me. You are to depend on yourself. 
It falls out very luckily too at this Time
when you have it in your Power so
greatly to oblige us.’ 
‘What, my Lord, is in my Power? cries
the Doctor.’ 

‘You certainly know, answer'd his
Lordship, how hard Colonel Trompington
is run at your Town, in the Election
of a Mayor; they tell me it will be a
very near Thing, unless you join us. 
But we know it is in your Power to do
the Business, and turn the Scale. I heard
your Name mention'd the other Day on
that Account; and I know you may
have any Thing in Reason, if you will
give us your Interest.’ 
‘Sure, my Lord, cries the Doctor, you
are not in Earnest in asking my Interest
for the Colonel.’ 
‘Indeed I am, answer'd the Peer. Why
should you doubt it?’ 
‘For many Reasons, answer'd the
Doctor. First, I am an old Friend and
Acquaintance of Mr. Fairfield, as your
Lordship, I believe, very well knows. 
The little Interest, therefore, that I have,
you may be assured, will go in his Favour. 
Indeed I do not concern myself
deeply in these Affairs: for I do not
think it becomes my Cloth so to do. 
But as far as I think it decent to interest 

myself, it will certainly be on the Side
of Mr. Fairfield. Indeed I should do
so, if I was acquainted with both the
Gentlemen, only by Reputation: the
one being a neighbouring Gentleman,
of a very large Estate, a very sober and
sensible Man, of known Probity and
Attachment to the true Interest of his
Country. The other is a mere Stranger,
a Boy, a Soldier of Fortune, and as far
as I can discern from the little Conversation
I have had with him, of a very
shallow Capacity, and no Education.’ 
‘No Education! my dear Friend, cries
the Nobleman. Why he hath been
educated in half the Courts of Europe.’ 
‘Perhaps so, my Lord, answer'd the
Doctor; but I shall always be so great
a Pedant as to call a Man of no Learning,
a Man of no Education. — 
And from my own Knowledge, I can
aver, that I am persuaded there is scarce
a Foot Soldier in the Army who is more
illiterate than the Colonel.’ 
‘Why as to Latin and Greek, you
know, replied the Lord, they are not
much requir'd in the Army.’ 

‘It may be so, said the Doctor. Then
let such Persons keep to their own Profession. 
It is a very low civil Capacity
indeed for which an illiterate Man can
be qualified. And to speak a plain
Truth, if your Lordship is a Friend
to the Colonel, you would do well to
advise him to decline an Attempt, in
which I am certain he hath no Probability
of Success.’ 
‘Well, Sir, said the Lord, if you are
resolv'd against us, I must deal as freely
with you, and tell you plainly I cannot
serve you in your Affair. Nay it will
be the best Thing I can do, to hold
my Tongue: for if I should mention
his Name with your Recommendation
after what you have said, he would perhaps
never get provided for as long as
he lives.’ 
‘Is his own Merit then, my Lord, no
Recommendation?’ cries the Doctor. 
‘My dear, dear Sir, cries the other— 
What is the Merit of a Subaltern Officer?’ 

‘Surely, my Lord, cries the Doctor,
it is the Merit which should recommend
him to the Post of a Subaltern Officer. 
And it is a Merit which will hereafter
qualify him to serve his Country in a
higher Capacity. And I do assure you
of this young Man, that he hath not
only a good Heart, but a good Head
too. And I have been told by those
who are Judges, that he is for his Age
an excellent Officer.’ 
‘Very probably! cries my Lord— 
And there are Abundance with the same
Merit, and the same Qualifications, who
want a Morsel of Bread for themselves
and their Families.’ 
‘It is an infamous Scandal on the Nation,
cries the Doctor; and I am heartily
sorry it can be said even with a Colour
of Truth.’ 
‘How can it be otherwise? says the Peer. 
Do you think it is possible to provide
for all Men of Merit?’ 
‘Yes, surely do I, said the Doctor. And
very easily too.’ 

‘How pray?—cries the Lord— 
Upon my Word I shall be glad to know.’ 
‘Only by not providing for those of
none—The Men of Merit in any
Capacity are not I am afraid so extremely
numerous, that we need starve any
of them, unless we wickedly suffer a
Set of worthless Fellows to eat their
Bread.’ 
‘This is all mere Utopia, cries his
Lordship. The Chimercal System of
Plato's Commonwealth with which we
amused ourselves at the University; 
Politics which are inconsistent with the
State of Human Affairs.’ 
‘Sure, my Lord, cries the Doctor, we
have read of States where such Doctrines
have been put in Practice. What is
your Lordship's Opinion of Rome in
the earlier Ages of the Commonwealth,
of Sparta, and even of Athens itself, in
some Periods of its History?’ 
‘Indeed, Doctor, cries the Lord, all
these Notions are obsolete and long since
exploded. To apply Maxims of Government 

drawn from the Greek and
Roman Histories, to this Nation, is absurd
and impossible. But if you will
have Roman Examples, fetch them from
Times like our own. Do you not know,
Doctor, that this is as corrupt a Nation
as ever existed under the Sun? And
would you think of governing such a
People by the strict Principles of Honesty
and Morality?’ 
‘If it be so corrupt, said the Doctor,
I think it is high Time to amend it. Or
else it is easy to foresee the Consequence:
for Corruption in the Body Politic as
naturally tends to Dissolution as in the
Natural Body.’ 
‘I thank you for your Simile, cries my
Lord: for in the Natural Body, I believe,
you will allow there is the Season
of Youth, the Season of Manhood, and
the Season of Old Age; and that,
when the last of these arrives, it will
be an impossible Attempt by all the
Means of Art to restore the Body again
to its Youth, or to the Vigour of its
middle Age. The same Periods happen
to every great Kingdom. In its
Youth it rises by Arts and Arms to 

Power and Prosperity. This it enjoys
and flourishes with a while; and then it
may be said to be in the Vigour of its
Age, enrich'd at home with all the
Emoluments and Blessings of Peace,
and formidable abroad with all the Terrors
of War. At length this very
Prosperity introduces Corruption; and
then comes on its old Age. Virtue
and Learning, Art and Industry, decay
by Degrees. The People sink into
Sloth and Luxury, and Prostitution. 
It is enervated at home, becomes contemptible
abroad; and such indeed is
its Misery and Wretchedness, that it resembles
a Man in the last decrepid Stage
of Life, who looks with Unconcern at
his approaching Dissolution.’ 
‘This is a melancholy Picture indeed,’ 
cries the Doctor; ‘and if the latter Part
of it can be applied to our Case, I see
nothing but Religion which should prevent
a Man of Spirit from hanging himself
out of the Way of so wretched a
Contemplation.’ 
‘Why so?’ said the Peer; ‘Why hang
himself, Doctor? Would it not be wiser,
think you, to make the best of your 

Time, and the most you can in such a
Nation?’ 
‘And is Religion then to be really laid
out of the Question?’ cries the Doctor. 
‘If I am to speak my own Opinion,
Sir,’ answered the Peer, ‘you know I
shall answer in the Negative. —But you
are too well acquainted with the World
to be told, that the Conduct of Politicians
is not formed upon the Principles of
Religion.’ 
‘I am very sorry for it,’ cries the Doctor; 
‘but I will talk to them then of Honour
and Honesty: This is a Language
which I hope they will at least pretend
to understand. Now to deny a Man
the Preferment which he merits, and to
give it to another Man who doth not
merit it, is a manifest Act of Injustice; 
and is consequently inconsistent with both
Honour and Honesty. Nor is it only an
Act of Injustice to the Man himself, but
to the Public, for whose Good principally
all public Offices are, or ought to
be instituted. Now this Good can never
be completed, nor obtained, but by employing
all Persons according to their 

Capacities. Wherever true Merit is liable
to be superseded by Favour and
Partiality, and Men are intrusted with
Offices, without any Regard to Capacity
or Integrity, the Affairs of that State
will always be in a deplorable Situation. 
Such, as Livy tells us, was the State of
Capua, a little before its final Destruction; 
and the Consequence your Lordship well
knows. But, my Lord, there is another
Mischief which attends this Kind of Injustice,
and that is, it hath a manifest
Tendency to destroy all Virtue and all
Ability among the People, by taking
away all that Encouragement and Incentive,
which should promote Emulation,
and raise Men to aim at excelling
in any Art, Science, or Profession. Nor
can any Thing, my Lord, contribute
more to render a Nation contemptible
among its Neighbours; for what Opinion
can other Countries have of the Councils,
or what Terror can they conceive
of the Arms of such a People? And it
was owing singly, perhaps, to the avoiding
this Error, that Oliver Cromwell carried
the Reputation of England higher
than it ever was at any other Time. I
will add only one Argument more, and
that is founded on the most narrow and
selfish System of Politics; and this is, 

that such a Conduct is sure to create
universal Discontent and Grumbling at
home: For nothing can bring Men to
rest satisfied, when they see others preferred
to them, but an Opinion that they
deserve that Elevation; for as one of the
greatest Men this Country ever produced,
observes, 

‘One worthless Man that gains what he pretends,
‘Disgusts a thousand unpretending Friends.’
‘With what Heartburnings then must any
Nation see themselves obliged to contribute
to the Support of a Set of Men, of whose Incapacity
to serve them they are well apprized,
and who do their Country a double Diskindness; 
by being themselves employed
in Posts to which they are unequal, and
by keeping others out of those Employments,
for which they are qualified!’ 
‘And do you really think, Doctor,’ 
cries the Nobleman, ‘that any Minister
could support himself in this Country
upon such Principles as you recommend? 
Do you think he would be able to baffle
an Opposition, unless he should oblige
his Friends by conferring Places often,
contrary to his own Inclinations, and his
own Opinion?’ 

‘Yes, really do I,’ cries the Doctor. 
‘Indeed if a Minister is resolved to make
good his Confession in the Liturgy, by
leaving undone all those Things which
he ought to have done, and by doing all
those Things which he ought not to have
done: Such a Minister, I grant, will be
obliged to baffle Opposition, as you are
pleased to term it; for as Shakespeare
somewhere says, 

‘Things ill begun strengthen themselves by Ill.’
‘But if, on the contrary, he will please
to consider the true Interest of his
Country, and that only in great and national
Points; if he will engage his
Country in neither Alliances or Quarrels,
but where it is really interested; if
he will raise no Money but what is
wanted; nor employ any civil or military
Officers but what are useful; and
place in these Employments Men of the
highest Integrity, and of the greatest Abilities; 
if he will employ some few of
his Hours to advance our Trade, and
some few more to regulate our domestic
Government: If he would do this, my
Lord, I will answer for it he shall have
no Opposition to baffle. Such a Minister
may, in the Language of the Law, put 

himself on his Country when he pleases
and he shall come off with Honour and
Applause.’ 
‘And do you really believe, Doctor,
cries the Peer, there ever was such a Minister,
or ever will be?’ 
‘Why not, my Lord?’ answered the
Doctor. ‘It requires no very extraordinary
Parts, nor any extraordinary Degree
of Virtue. He need practise no
great Instances of Self-denial. He shall
have Power, and Honour, and Riches,
and perhaps all in a much greater Degree
than he can ever acquire, by pursuing
a contrary System. He shall have more
of each, and much more of Safety.’ 
‘Pray, Doctor,’ said my Lord, ‘let
me ask you one simple Question. Do you
really believe any Man upon Earth was
ever a Rogue out of Choice?’ 
‘Really, my Lord,’ says the Doctor,
‘I am ashamed to answer in the Affirmative; 
and yet I am afraid Experience
would almost justify me if I should. 
Perhaps the Opinion of the World may
sometimes mislead Men to think those
Measures necessary, which in reality are 

not so. Or the Truth may be, that a
Man of good Inclinations finds his Office
filled with such Corruption by the Iniquity
of his Predecessors, that he may despair of
being capable of purging it; and so sits
down contented, as Augeas did with the
Filth of his Stables, not because he thought
them the better, or that such Filth was
really necessary to a Stable; but that he
despaired of sufficient Force to cleanse
them.’ 
‘I will ask you one Question more, and
I have done,’ said the Nobleman. ‘Do
you imagine that if any Minister was
really as good as you would have him,
that the People in general would believe
that he was so?’ 
‘Truly, my Lord,’ said the Doctor,
‘I think they may be justified in not believing
too hastily. But I beg Leave to
answer your Lordship's Question by another. 
Doth your Lordship believe that
the People of Greenland, when they see
the Light of the Sun, and feel his Warmth,
after so long a Season of Cold and Darkness,
will really be persuaded that he
shines upon them?’ 

My Lord smiled at the Conceit; and
then the Doctor took an Opportunity to
renew his Suit, to which his Lordship answered
he would promise nothing, and
could give him no Hopes of Success: 
‘But you may be assured,’ said he with a
leering Countenance, ‘I shall do him all
the Service in my Power.’ A Language
which the Doctor well understood, and
soon after took a civil, but not a very ceremonial
Leave. 



The History of Mr. Trent. 
We will now return to Mr. Booth and his
Wife. The former had spent his Time
very uneasily, ever since he had discovered
what sort of Man he was indebted to; but,
lest he should forget it, Mr. Trent thought
now proper to remind him, in the following
Letter, which he read the next Morning
after he had put off the Appointment. 

‘SIR,
I am sorry the Necessity of my Affairs
obliges me to mention that small Sum
which I had the Honour to lend you the 

other Night at Play; and which I shall
be much obliged to you, if you will let
me have some time either to Day, or Tomorrow. I am,’ 
‘SIR,
Your most obedient,
most humble Servant,
Geo. Trent.’ 
This Letter a little surprized Booth, after
the genteel, and indeed, as it appeared,
generous Behaviour of Trent. But lest it
should have the same Effect upon the
Reader, we will now proceed to account for
this, as well as for some other Phænomena
that have appeared in this History, and
which perhaps we shall be forgiven, for not
having opened more largely before. 
Mr. Trent then was a Gentleman, possibly
of a good Family; for it was not certain
whence he sprung on the Father's Side. 
His Mother, who was the only Parent he
ever knew or heard of, was a single Gentlewoman,
and for some Time carried on
the Trade of a Milliner in Covent-Garden. 
She sent her Son, at the Age of eight Years
old, to a Charity-School, where he remained
'till he was of the Age of fourteen, 

without making any great Proficiency in
Learning. Indeed it is not very probable
he should; for the Master who, in Preference
to a very learned and proper Man,
was chosen by a Party into this School, the
Salary of which was upwards of 100l. a
Year, had himself never travelled through
the Latin Grammar, and was in Truth a
most consummate Blockhead. 
At the Age of fifteen Mr. Trent was put
Clerk to an Attorney, where he remained
a very short Time before he took Leave of
his Master; rather, indeed, departed without
taking Leave; and having broke open
his Mother's Escritore, and carried off
with him all the valuable Effects he there
found, to the Amount of about fifty Pound,
he marched off to Sea, and went on Board
a Merchantman, whence he was afterwards
pressed into a Man of War. 
In this Service he continued above three
Years; during which Time he behaved so
ill in his moral Character, that he twice
underwent a very severe Discipline for
Thefts in which he was detected; but at
the same Time, he behaved so well as a
Sailor in an Engagement with some Pirates,
that he wiped off all former Scores, 

and greatly recommended himself to his
Captain. 
At his return home, he being then about
twenty Years of Age, he found that the
Attorney had in his Absence married his
Mother, had buried her, and secured all her
Effects, to the Amount, as he was inform'd,
of about fifteen hundred Pound. Trent
applied to his Step-Father, but to no
Purpose; the Attorney utterly disowned
him, nor would he suffer him to come
a second Time within his Doors. 
It happened that the Attorney had, by
a former Wife, an only Daughter, a great
Favourite, who was about the same Age
with Trent himself; and had, during his
Residence at her Father's House, taken a
very great Liking to this young Fellow, who
was extremely handsome, and perfectly
well made. This her Liking was not,
during his Absence, so far extinguished,
but that it immediately revived on his return. 
Of this she took Care to give Mr.
Trent proper Intimation; for she was not
one of those backward and delicate Ladies,
who can die rather than make the first
Overture. Trent was overjoyed at this,
and with Reason; for she was a very lovely 

Girl in her Person, the only Child of a
rich Father; and the Prospect of so complete
a Revenge on the Attorney charmed
him above all the rest. To be as short in
the Matter as the Parties, a Marriage was
soon consummated between them. 
The Attorney at first raged and was
implacable; but at last Fondness for his
Daughter so far overcame Resentment, that
he advanced a Sum of Money to buy his
Son-in-Law (for now he acknowledged
him as such) an Ensign's Commission in a
marching Regiment then ordered to Gibraltar; 
at which Place the Attorney heartily
hoped that Trent might be knocked
on the Head: for in that Case he thought
he might marry his Daughter more agreeably
to his own Ambition, and to her Advantage. 
The Regiment into which Trent purchased,
was the same with that in which Booth likewise
served; the one being an Ensign,
and the other a Lieutenant in the two additional
Companies. 
Trent had no Blemish in his military
Capacity. Though he had had but an indifferent
Education, he was naturally sensible 

and genteel, and Nature, as we have
said, had given him a very agreeable Person. 
He was likewise a very bold Fellow,
and as he really behaved himself every
way well enough, while he was at Gibraltar,
there was some Degree of Intimacy between
him and Booth. 
When the Siege was over, and the additional
Companies were again reduced, Trent
returned to his Wife, who received him
with great Joy and Affection. Soon after
this an Accident happened, which proved
the utter Ruin of his Father-in-Law,
and ended in breaking his Heart. This
was nothing but making a Mistake
pretty common at this Day, of writing
another Man's Name to a Deed instead
of his own. In truth, this Matter was
no less than what the Law calls Forgery,
and was just then made capital by an Act
of Parliament. From this Offence indeed
the Attorney was acquitted by not admitting
the Proof of the Party who was to
avoid his own Deed, by his Evidence; 
and therefore no Witness, according to those
excellent Rules, called the Law of Evidence; 
a Law very excellently calculated
for the Preservation of the Lives of his 

Majesty's roguish Subjects, and most notably
used for that Purpose. 
But tho' by common Law the Attorney was
honourably acquitted; yet as common Sense
manifested to every one that he was guilty,
he unhappily lost his Reputation, and of
Consequence his Business; the Chagrin of
which latter soon put an End to his Life. 
This Prosecution had been attended with
a very great Expence; for besides the ordinary
Costs of avoiding the Gallows by
the Help of the Law, there was a very
high Article of no less than a thousand
Pounds paid down to remove out of the
Way a Witness, against whom there was
no legal Exception. The poor Gentleman
had besides suffered some Losses in Business; 
so that to the Surprise of all his
Acquaintance, when his Debts were paid
there remained no more than a small Estate
of fourscore Pounds a Year, which he
settled upon his Daughter, far out of the
Reach of her Husband, and about two
hundred Pounds in Money. 
The old Gentleman had not long been
in his Grave, before Trent set himself to
consider seriously of the State of his Affairs. 

He had lately begun to look on
his Wife with a much less Degree of liking
and Desire than formerly; for he was one
of those who think too much of one thing
is good for nothing. Indeed he had indulged
these Speculations so far, that I
believe his Wife, though one of the prettiest
Women in Town, was the last Subject
that he would have chose for any amorous
Dalliance. 
Many other Persons however, greatly
differed from him in this Opinion. Amongst
the rest was the illustrious Peer
of amorous Memory. This noble Peer
having therefore got a View of Mrs. Trent
one Day in the Street, did, by Means of
an Emissary then with him, make himself
acquainted with her Lodging, to which he
immediately laid Siege in Form, setting
himself down in a Lodging directly opposite
to her, from whence the Battery
of Ogles began to play the very next
Morning. 
This Siege had not continued long before
the Governor of the Garrison became
sufficiently apprised of all the Works which
were carrying on, and having well reconnoitred
the Enemy, and discovered who 

he was, notwithstanding a false Name,
and some Disguise of his Person, he called
a Council of War within his own Breast. In
Fact, to drop all Allegory, he began to
consider whether his Wife was not really
a more valuable Possession than he had
lately thought her. In short, as he had
been disappointed in her Fortune, he now
conceived some Hopes of turning her Beauty
itself into a Fortune. 
Without communicating these Views to
her, he soon scraped an Acquaintance with
his opposite Neighbour by the Name which
he there usurped, and counterfeited an entire
Ignorance of his real Name and Title. 
On this Occasion Trent had his Disguise
likewise, for he affected the utmost Simplicity; 
of which Affectation, as he was
a very artful Fellow, he was extremely
capable. 
The Peer fell plumb into this Snare; 
and when, by the Simplicity, as he imagined,
of the Husband he became acquainted
with the Wife, he was so extravagantly
charmed with her Person, that
he resolved, whatever was the Cost or the
Consequence, he would possess her. 

His Lordship, however, preserved some
Caution in his Management of this Affair; 
more, perhaps, than was necessary. As
for the Husband, none was requisite; for he
knew all he could; and with regard to the
Wife herself, as she had, for some Time,
perceived the Decrease of her Husband's
Affection, (for few Women are, I believe,
to be imposed upon in that Matter) she
was not displeased to find the Return of
all that Complaisance and Endearment, of
those Looks and Languishments from another
agreeable Person which she had formerly
received from Trent, and which she
now found she should receive from him
no longer. 
My Lord, therefore, having been indulged
with as much Opportunity as he
could wish from Trent, and having received
rather more Encouragement than
he could well have hoped from the Lady,
began to prepare all Matters for a Storm,
when luckily Mr. Trent declaring he must
go out of Town for two Days, he fix'd on
the first Day of his Departure as the Time
of carrying his Design into Execution. 
And now, after some Debate with himself
in what Manner he should approach 

his Love, he at last determined to do it in
his own Person; for he conceived, and
perhaps very rightly, that the Lady, like
Semele, was not void of Ambition, and
would have preferred Jupiter in all his
Glory to the same Deity in the Disguise
of an humble Shepherd. He dressed himself
therefore in the richest Embroidery of
which he was Master, and appeared before
his Mistress array'd in all the Brightness
of Peerage. A Sight whose Charms
she had not the Power to resist, and the
Consequences are only to be imagined. In
short, the same Scene which Jupiter acted
with his above mentioned Mistress of old,
was more than beginning, when Trent burst
from the Closet into which he had convey'd
himself, and unkindly interrupted
the Action. 
His Lordship presently run to his Sword; 
but Trent, with great Calmness, answered,
that as it was very well known he durst
fight, he should not draw his Sword on
this Occasion: ‘For sure,’ says he, ‘my
Lord, it would be the highest Imprudence
in me to kill a Man who is now
become so considerably my Debtor.’ At
which Words he fetched a Person from
the Closet, who had been confined with 

with him, telling him he had done his
Business, and might now, if he pleased,
retire. 
It would be tedious here to amuse the
Reader with all that passed on the present
Occasion; the Rage and Confusion of
the Wife, or the Perplexity in which my
Lord was involved. We will omit therefore
all such Matters, and proceed directly
to Business, as Trent and his Lordship
did soon after. And in the Conclusion,
my Lord stipulated to pay a good round
Sum, and to provide Mr. Trent with a
good Place on the first Opportunity. 
On the Side of Mr. Trent were stipulated
absolute Remission of all past, and full Indulgence
for the Time to come. 
Trent now immediately took a House
at the polite End of the Town, furnished
it elegantly, set up his Equipage, rigged
out both himself and his Wife with very
handsome Cloaths, frequented all publick
Places where he could get Admission,
pushed himself into Acquaintance, and his
Wife soon afterwards began to keep an
Assembly, or in the fashionable Phrase, to
be at home once a Week; when, by my 

Lord's Assistance, she was presently visited
by most Men of the first Rank, and by
all such Women of Fashion as are not very
nice in their Company. 
My Lord's Amour with this Lady lasted
not long; for as we have before observed,
he was the most inconstant of all human
Race. Mrs. Trent's Passion was not however
of that Kind which leads to any very deep
Resentment of such Fickleness. Her Passion
indeed was principally founded upon
Interest; so that Foundation served to support
another Superstructure; and she was
easily prevailed upon, as well as her Husband,
to be useful to my Lord in a Capacity,
which, though very often exerted in
the polite World, hath not, as yet, to my
great Surprise, acquired any polite Name,
or indeed any which is not too coarse to be
admitted in this History. 
After this Preface, which we thought
necessary to account for a Character of
which some of my Country and Collegiate
Readers might possibly doubt the
Existence, I shall proceed to what more
immediately regards Mrs. Booth. The
Reader may be pleased to remember that
Mr. Trent was present at the Assembly to 

which Booth and his Wife were carried
by Mrs. James, and where Amelia was met
by the noble Peer. 
His Lordship seeing there that Booth
and Trent were old Acquaintance, failed
not, to use the Language of Sportsmen,
to put Trent on upon the Scent of Amelia. For
this Purpose that Gentleman visited Booth the
very next Day, and had pursued him close
ever since. By his Means therefore my Lord
learn'd that Amelia was to be at the Masquerade,
to which Place she was dogg'd by
Trent in a Sailor's Jacket, who meeting my
Lord according to Agreement, at the Entrance
of the Opera-House, like the Four-legged
Gentlemen of the same Vocation,
made a dead Point, as it is called, at the
Game. 
My Lord was so satisfied and delighted
with his Conversation at the Masquerade
with the supposed Amelia, and the Encouragement
which in reality she had given him,
that when he saw Trent the next Morning,
he embraced him with great Fondness,
gave him a Bank Note of 100l. and promised
him both the Indies on his Success,
of which he began now to have no manner
of Doubt. 

The Affair that happened at the Gaming
Table, was likewise a Scheme of Trent's,
on a Hint given by my Lord to him to
endeavour to lead Booth into some Scrape
or Distress, his Lordship promising to pay
whatever Expence Trent might be led into
by such Means. Upon his Lordship's Credit
therefore the Money lent to Booth was
really advanced. And hence arose all that
seeming Generosity, and Indifference as to
the Payment. Trent being satisfied with
the Obligation conferred on Booth, by
Means of which he hoped to effect his
Purpose. 
But now the Scene was totally changed; 
for Mrs. Atkinson, the Morning after the
Quarrel, beginning seriously to recollect
that she had carried the Matter rather too
far, and might really injure Amelia's Reputation,
a Thought to which the warm
Pursuit of her own Interest had a good
deal blinded her at the Time, resolved to
visit my Lord himself, and to let him
into the whole Story; for, as she had succeeded
already in her favourite Point, she
thought she had no Reason to fear any
Consequence of the Discovery. This Resolution
she immediately executed. 

Trent came to attend his Lordship just
after Mrs. Atkinson had left him. He found
the Peer in a very ill Humour, and brought
no News to comfort or recruit his Spirits; 
for he had himself just received a Billet
from Booth, with an Excuse for himself
and his Wife, from accepting the Invitation
at Trent's House that Evening, where
Matters had been previously concerted for
their Entertainment; and when his Lordship
was by Accident to drop into the
Room where Amelia was, while Booth was
to be engaged at Play in another. 
And now after much Debate, and after
Trent had acquainted my Lord with the
wretched Situation of Booth's Circumstances,
it was resolved, that Trent should immediately
demand his Money of Booth, and
upon his not paying it, for they both concluded
it impossible he should pay it, to
put the Note which Trent had for the
Money, in Suit against him by the genteel
Means of paying it away to a nominal
third Person; and this they both conceived
must end immediately in the Ruin of
Booth, and consequently in the Conquest of
Amelia. 

In this Project, and with this Hope,
both my Lord and his Setter, or (if the
Sportsmen please) Setting-Dog, both greatly
exulted, and it was next Morning executed,
as we have already seen. 



Containing some Distress. 
Trent's Letter drove Booth almost
to Madness. To be indebted to such
a Fellow, at any rate, had stuck much in
his Stomach, and had given him very great
Uneasiness; but to answer this Demand in
any other Manner, than by paying the
Money, was absolutely what he could not
bear. Again, to pay this Money he very
plainly saw there was but one Way; and
this was by stripping his Wife not only of
every Farthing, but almost of every Rag
she had in the World; a Thought so
dreadful, that it chilled his very Soul
with Horrour; and yet Pride at last seemed
to represent this as the lesser Evil of the
two. 
But how to do this was still a Question. 
It was not sure, at least he feared it was
not, that Amelia herself would readily consent 

to this; and so far from persuading
her to such a Measure, he could not bear
even to propose it. At length his Determination
was to acquaint his Wife with
the whole Affair, and to ask her Consent
by way of asking her Advice; for he was
well assured she could find no other Means
of extricating him out of his Dilemma. 
This he accordingly did, representing the
Affair as bad as he could; though indeed
it was impossible for him to aggravate the
real Truth. 
Amelia heard him patiently without once
interrupting him. When he had finished,
she remained silent some Time: Indeed the
Shock she received from this Story, almost
deprived her of the Power of Speaking. 
At last she answered: ‘Well, my Dear,
you ask my Advice; I certainly can give
you no other than that the Money must
be paid.’ 
‘But how must it be paid?’ cries he. 
‘Oh Heavens! thou sweetest Creature,
what not once upbraid me for bringing
this Ruin on thee!’ 
‘Upbraid you, my Dear!’ said she— 
‘Would to Heaven I could prevent your 

upbraiding yourself. But do not despair,
I will endeavour by some Means or other
to get you the Money.’ 
‘Alas! my dear Love,’ cries Booth,
‘I know the only Way by which you can
raise it. How can I consent to that? Do
you forget the Fears you so lately expressed
of what would be our wretched
Condition, when our little All was mouldered
away? —O, my Amelia, they cut
my very Heart-strings, when you spoke
then; for I had then lost this little All. 
Indeed I assure you I have not played
since, nor ever will more.’ 
‘Keep that Resolution,’ said she, ‘my
Dear, and I hope we shall yet recover
the Past’—At which Words casting her
Eyes on the Children, the Tears burst from
her Eyes, and she cry'd—‘Heaven will,
I hope, provide for us.’ 
A pathetic Scene now ensued between
the Husband and Wife, which would not
perhaps please many Readers to see drawn
at too full a Length. It is sufficient to say,
that this excellent Woman not only used
her utmost Endeavours to stifle and conceal
her own Concern, but said, and did 

every Thing in her Power to allay that of
her Husband. 
Booth was at this Time to meet a Person
whom we have formerly mentioned in
the Course of our History. This Gentleman
had a Place in the War-Office, and
pretended to be a Man of great Interest
and Consequence; by which Means he did
not only receive great Respect and Court
from the inferiour Officers, but actually
bubbled several of their Money, by undertaking
to do them Services which, in reality,
were not within his Power. In
Truth, I have known few great Men who
have not been beset with one or more
such Fellows as these, through whom the
inferiour Part of Mankind are obliged to
make their Court to the great Men themselves; 
by which Means, I believe principally,
Persons of real Merit have been
often deterred from the Attempt; for these
subaltern Coxcombs ever assume an equal
State with their Masters, and look for an
equal Degree of Respect to be paid to
them; to which Men of Spirit, who are
in every Light their Betters, are not easily
brought to submit. These Fellows indeed
themselves have a jealous Eye towards all
great Abilities, and are sure, to the utmost 

of their Power, to keep all who are so endowed,
from the Presence of their Masters. 
They use their Masters, as bad Ministers
have sometimes used a Prince; they keep all
Men of Merit from his Ears, and daily
sacrifice his true Honour and Interest to
their own Profit, and their own Vanity. 
As soon as Booth was gone to his Appointment
with this Man, Amelia immediately
betook herself to her Business with
the highest Resolution. She packed up
not only her own little Trinkets, and those
of the Children, but the greatest Part of
her own poor Cloaths, (for she was but
barely provided) and then drove in a Hackney-Coach
to the same Pawnbroker's, who
had before been recommended to her by
Mrs. Atkinson. This worthy Person offered
to lend her so very little on her Goods,
(not the fourth Part of their Value) that she
was not able to raise the Sum she wanted. 
This dejected the poor Woman to the
lowest Degree in the World, and she now
determined to sell them outright; but unfortunately
she knew not to what Market
to carry them. In this Distress, it luckily
occurred to her Mind that her Husband
had told her there was no kind of Information 

whatsoever, which was not to be had
at the Universal Register-Office. Thither she
immediately drove, and was there recommended
to a Person, who not only advanced
her the Money she desired, but at
a much less Interest than the Pawnbroker
would have insisted on. 
Being now provided with her Sum she
returned well pleased home; and her Husband
coming in soon after, she with much
Chearfulness delivered him all the Money. 
Booth was so overjoyed with the Prospect
of discharging his Debt to Trent, that
he did not perfectly reflect on the Distress
to which his Family was now reduced. 
The good Humour which appeared in the
Countenance of Amelia, was perhaps another
Help to stifle those Reflexions; but
above all were the Assurances he had received
from the great Man, whom he had
met at a Coffee-House, and who had promised
to do him all the Service in his Power; 
which several halfpay subaltern Officers
assured him was very considerable. 
With this comfortable News he acquainted
his Wife, who either was, or
seemed to be extremely well pleased with 

it. And now he set out with the Money
in his Pocket to pay his Friend Trent, who
unluckily for him happened not to be at
home. 
On his return home he met his old
Friend the Lieutenant, who thankfully paid
him his Crown, and insisted on his going
with him and taking Part of a Bottle. 
This Invitation was so eager and pressing,
that poor Booth, who could not resist much
Importunity, complied. 
While they were over this Bottle, Booth
acquainted his Friend with the Promises
he had received that Afternoon at the Coffee-House,
with which the old Gentleman
was very well pleased: ‘For I have heard,’ 
says he, ‘that Gentleman hath very powerful
Interest;’ but he informed him
likewise, that he had heard that the great
Man must be touched; for that he never
did any Thing without touching. Of this,
indeed, the great Man himself had given
some oblique Hints, by saying, with great
Sagacity and Slyness, that he knew where
fifty Pound might be deposited to much
Advantage. 

Booth answered that he would very readily
advance a small Sum, if he had it in
his Power, but that at present it was not
so; for that he had no more in the World
than the Sum of fifty Pounds, which he
owed Trent, and which he intended to pay
him the next Morning. 
‘It is very right undoubtedly to pay
your Debts,’ says the old Gentleman; 
‘but sure, on such an Occasion, any Man
but the rankest Usurer would be contented
to stay a little While for his Money; 
and it will be only a little While I
am convinced: For if you deposite this
Sum in the great Man's Hands, I make
no Doubt but you will succeed immediately
in getting your Commission; and
then I will help you to a Method of
taking up such a Sum as this.’ The old
Gentleman persisted in this Advice, and
backed it with every Argument he could
invent; declaring, as was indeed true,
that he gave the same Advice which he
would pursue, was the Case his own. 
Booth long rejected the Opinion of his
Friend; 'till, as they had not argued with
dry Lips, he became heated with Wine, 

and then at last the old Gentleman succeeded. 
Indeed, such was his Love either for
Booth, or for his own Opinion, and perhaps
for both, that he omitted nothing in
his Power. He even endeavoured to palliate
the Character of Trent, and unsaid
half what he had before said of that Gentleman. 
In the End he undertook to make
Trent easy, and to go to him the very next
Morning for that Purpose. 
Poor Booth at last yielded, though
with the utmost Difficulty. Indeed had
he known quite as much of Trent as the
Reader doth, no Motive whatsoever would
have prevailed on him to have taken the
old Gentleman's Advice. 



Containing more Wormwood, and other Ingredients. 
In the Morning Booth communicated
the Matter to Amelia, who told him she
would not presume to advise him in an
Affair, of which he was so much the better
Judge. 

While Booth remained in a doubtful
State what Conduct to pursue, Williams
came to make him a Visit, and informed
him that he had been at Trent's House,
but found him not at home; adding, that
he would pay him a second Visit that very
Day, and would not rest 'till he found
him. 
Booth was ashamed to confess his wavering
Resolution, in an Affair in which
he had been so troublesome to his Friend; 
he therefore dressed himself immediately,
and together they both went to wait on the
little great Man, to whom Booth now
hoped to pay his Court in the most effectual
Manner. 
Williams had been longer acquainted
with the modern Methods of Business than
Booth; he advised his Friend therefore to
begin with tipping (as it is called) the great
Man's Servant. He did so, and by that
Means got speedy Access to the Master. 
The great Man received the Money, not
as a Gudgeon doth a Bait, but as a Pike
receives a poor Gudgeon into his Maw. 
To say the Truth, such Fellows as these 

may well be likened to that voracious Fish,
who fattens himself by devouring all the
little Inhabitants of the River. As soon
as the great Man had pocketed the Cash,
he shook Booth by the Hand, and told him
he would be sure to slip no Opportunity
of serving him, and would send him Word
as soon as any offered. 
Here I shall stop one Moment, and so
perhaps will my goodnatured Reader; 
for surely it must be a hard Heart which is
not affected, with reflecting on the Manner
in which this poor little Sum was raised,
and on the Manner in which it was bestowed. 
A worthy Family, the Wife and
Children of a Man who had lost his Blood
abroad in the Service of his Country,
parting with their little all, and exposed
to Cold and Hunger, to pamper such a
Fellow as this. 
And if any such Reader, as I mention,
should happen to be in reality a great Man,
and in Power, perhaps the Horrour of
this Picture may induce him to put a final
End to this abominable Practice of touching,
as it is called; by which indeed a Set
of Leaches are permitted to suck the Blood
of the Brave and the Indigent; of the
Widow and the Orphan. 

Booth now returned home, where he
found his Wife with Mrs. James. Amelia
had, before the Arrival of her Husband,
absolutely refused Mrs. James's Invitation
to Dinner the next Day; but when Booth
came in, the Lady renewed her Application,
and that in so pressing a Manner, that
Booth seconded her; for tho' he had enough
of Jealousy in his Temper; yet such was
his Friendship to the Colonel, and such his
Gratitude to the Obligations which he had
received from him, that his own Unwillingness
to believe any Thing of him, cooperating
with Amelia's Endeavours to put
every Thing in the fairest Light, had
brought him to acquit his Friend of any ill
Design. To this perhaps the late Affair
concerning my Lord had moreover contributed: 
For it seems to me, that the
same Passion cannot much energize on two
different Objects at one and the same Time:
an Observation which I believe will hold
as true, with regard to the cruel Passions
of Jealousy and Anger, as to the gentle
Passion of Love, in which one great and
mighty Object is sure to engage the whole
Passion. 

When Booth grew importunate, Amelia
answered, ‘My Dear, I should not refuse
you whatever was in my Power; but
this is absolutely out of my Power; for
since I must declare the Truth, I cannot
dress myself.’ 
‘Why so?’ said Mrs. James, ‘I am
sure you are very well.’ 
‘Is there no other Impediment to Dressing
but Health, Madam?’ answered Amelia. 
‘Upon my Word none that I know of,’ 
replied Mrs. James. 
‘What do you think of want of Cloaths,
Madam?’ said Amelia. 
‘Ridiculous!’ cried Mrs. James. ‘What
need have you to dress yourself out? — 
You will see no Body but our own Family,
and I promise you I don't expect
it. —A plain Night-Gown will do very
well.’ 
‘But if I must be plain with you, Madam,
said Amelia, I have no other Cloaths 

but what I have now on my Back. — 
I have not even a clean Shift in the
World: for you must know, my Dear,
said she to Booth, that little Betty is
walk'd off this Morning, and hath
carried all my Linen with her.’ 
‘How, my Dear, cries Booth, little
Betty robb'd you!’ 
‘It is even so, answer'd Amelia. Indeed
she spoke Truth; for little Betty having
perceiv'd the Evening before that her
Mistress was moving her Goods, was
willing to lend all the Assistance in her
Power, and had accordingly mov'd off
early that Morning, taking with her
whatever she could lay her Hands on.’ 
Booth expressed himself with some
Passion on the Occasion, and swore he
would make an Example of the Girl. ‘If
the little Slut be above Ground, cried
he, I will find her out and bring her to
Justice.’ 
‘I am really sorry for this Accident, said
Mrs. James, and (tho' I know not how to
mention it) I beg you'll give me Leave to 

offer you any Linen of mine, 'till you
can make new of your own.’ 
Amelia thank'd Mrs. James, but declin'd
the Favour, saying she should do well
enough at home; and that as she had no
Servant now to take Care of her Children,
she could not, nor would not leave them
on any Account. 
‘Then bring Master and Miss with you,
said Mrs. James. You shall positively
dine with us To-morrow.’ 
‘I beg, Madam, you will mention it
no more, said Amelia; for besides the
substantial Reasons I have already given,
I have some Things on my Mind at
present which make me unfit for Company; 
and I am resolved nothing shall
prevail on me to stir from home.’ 
Mrs. James had carried her Invitation
already to the very utmost Limits of
Good-Breeding, if not beyond them. She
desisted therefore from going any further,
and after some short Stay longer took her
Leave, with many Expressions of Concern,
which however great as it was left her Heart
and her Mouth together, before she was out
of the House. 

Booth now declar'd that he would go in
Pursuit of little Betty, against whom he
vowed so much Vengeance, that Amelia
endeavour'd to moderate his Anger by
representing to him the Girl's Youth, and
that this was the first Fault she had ever
been guilty of. ‘Indeed, says she, I
should be very glad to have my Things
again, and I would have the Girl too
punish'd in some Degree, which might
possibly be for her own Good; but I
tremble to think of taking away her
Life: for Booth in his Rage had sworn
he would hang her.’ 
‘I know the Tenderness of your Heart,
my Dear, said Booth, and I love you
for it; but I must beg Leave to dissent
from your Opinion. I do not think the
Girl in any Light an Object of Mercy. 
She is not only guilty of Dishonesty,
but of Cruelty: for she must know our
Situation, and the very little we had
left. She is besides guilty of Ingratitude
to you, who have treated her with so
much Kindness, that you have rather
acted the Part of a Mother than of a
Mistress. And so far from thinking her
Youth an Excuse, I think it rather an 

Aggravation. It is true indeed there
are Faults which the Youth of the Party
very strongly recommends to our Pardon. 
Such are all those which proceed
from Carelessness, and Want of Thought; 
but Crimes of this black Die, which
are committed with Deliberation and
imply a bad Mind, deserve a more severe
Punishment in a young Person than in
one of riper Years: for what must
the Mind be in old Age which hath acquir'd
such a Degree of Perfection in
Villainy so very early! Such Persons as
these it is really a Charity to the Public
to put out of the Society; and indeed
a Religious Man would put them out of
the World for the Sake of themselves; 
for whoever understands any Thing of
Human Nature must know, that such
People the longer they live, the more
they will accumulate Vice and Wickedness.’ 
‘Well, my Dear, cries Amelia, I cannot
argue with you on these Subjects. I shall
always submit to your superior Judgment,
and I know you too well to think
that you will ever do any Thing cruel.’ 

Booth then left Amelia to the Care of
her Children, and went in Pursuit of the
Thief. 



A Scene of the Tragic Kind. 
He had not been long gone, before a
thundring Knock was heard at the
Door of the House where Amelia lodged,
and presently after a Figure all pale, ghastly,
and almost breathless, rush'd into the
Room where she then was with her
Children. 
This Figure Amelia soon recognized to
be Mrs. Atkinson, tho' indeed she was so
disguised that at her first Entrance Amelia
scarce knew her. Her Eyes were sunk in
her Head, her Hair dishevelled, and not
only her Dress but every Feature in her
Face was in the utmost Disorder. 
Amelia was greatly shock'd at this Sight,
and the little Girl was much frightned; as
for the Boy he immediately knew her,
and running to Amelia, he cried, ‘La! 

Mamma, what is the Matter with poor
Mrs. Atkinson?’ 
As soon as Mrs. Atkinson recover'd her
Breath, she cried out—‘O Mrs. Booth,
I am the most miserable of Women; I
have lost the best of Husbands.’ 
Amelia looking at her with all the Tenderness
imaginable; forgetting, I believe,
that there had ever been any Quarrel between
them—said—‘Good Heavens,
Madam, what's the Matter?’ 
‘O Mrs. Booth, answer'd she, I fear I
have lost my Husband. The Doctor
says, there is but little Hope of his Life. 
O Madam, however I have been in the
Wrong I am sure you will forgive me
and pity me. I am sure I am severely
punish'd: for to that cursed Affair I owe
all my Misery.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam, cries Amelia, I am
extremely concern'd for your Misfortune. 
But pray tell me hath any Thing
happen'd to the Serjeant?’ 
‘O Madam, cries she, I have the greatest
Reason to fear I shall lose him. The 

Doctor hath almost given him over. — 
He says he hath scarce any Hopes. — 
O Madam, that Evening that the fatal
Quarrel happen'd between us, my dear
Captain took it so to Heart, that he sat
up all Night and drank a whole Bottle
of Brandy. —Indeed, he said, he
wish'd to kill himself: for nothing could
have hurt him so much in the World,
he said, as to have any Quarrel between
you and me. His Concern and what
he drank together threw him into a high
Fever. —So that when I came home
from my Lord's—(for indeed, Madam,
I have been and set all to Rights— 
Your Reputation is now in no Danger.) 
When I came home, I say, I found the
poor Man in a raving delirious Fit, and
in that he hath continued ever since 'till
about an Hour ago, when he came perfectly
to his Senses; but now he says he
is sure he shall die, and begs for Heaven's
Sake to see you first. Would you, Madam,
would you have the Goodness to
grant my poor Captain's Desire; consider
he is a dying Man, and neither he
nor I shall ever ask you a second Favour. 
He says he hath something to say to you
that he can mention to no other Person, 

and that he cannot die in Peace unless
he sees you.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Madam, cries Amelia,
I am extremely concern'd at what
you tell me. I knew the poor Serjeant
from his Infancy, and always had an
Affection for him, as I think him to be
one of the best-natur'd and honestest
Creatures upon Earth. I am sure if I
could do him any Service,—but of
what Use can my going be?—’ 
‘Of the highest in the World, answer'd
Mrs. Atkinson. If you knew how earnestly
he entreated it, how his poor
breaking Heart begged to see you, you
would not refuse.—’ 
‘Nay, I do not absolutely refuse, cries
Amelia. —Something to say to me of
Consequence, and that he could not die
in Peace, unless he said it—Did he say
that, Mrs. Atkinson?’ 
‘Upon my Honour he did, answer'd
she, and much more than I have related.’ 

‘Well, I will go with you,’ cries Amelia. 
‘I cannot guess what this should be; 
but I will go.’ 
Mrs. Atkinson then poured out a thousand
Blessings and Thanksgivings; and
taking hold of Amelia's Hand, and eagerly
kissing it, cried out—‘How could that
fury Passion drive me to quarrel with
such a Creature?’ 
Amelia told her she had forgiven and
forgot it; and then calling up the Mistress
of the House, and committing to her the
Care of the Children, she cloaked herself
up as well as she could, and set out with
Mrs. Atkinson. 
When they arrived at the House, Mrs.
Atkinson said she would go first and give the
Captain some Notice; for that if Amelia
entered the Room unexpectedly, the Surprize
might have an ill Effect. She left
therefore Amelia in the Parlour, and proceeded
directly up Stairs. 
Poor Atkinson, weak and bad as was his
Condition, no sooner heard that Amelia was
come, than he discovered great Joy in his 

Countenance, and presently afterwards she
was introduced to him. 
Atkinson exerted his utmost Strength to
thank her for this Goodness to a dying
Man, (for so he called himself.) He said
he should not have presumed to give her
this Trouble, had he not had something,
which he thought of Consequence, to say
to her, and which he could not mention
to any other Person. He then desired his
Wife to give him a little Box, of which
he always kept the Key himself, and afterwards
begged her to leave the Room for
a few Minutes; at which neither she, nor
Amelia, expressed any Dissatisfaction. 
When he was alone with Amelia, he
spoke as follows: ‘This, Madam, is the
last Time my Eyes will ever behold
what—Do pardon me, Madam, I will
never offend you more.’ —Here he
sunk down in his Bed, and the Tears
gushed from his Eyes. 
‘Why should you fear to offend me,
Joe,’ said Amelia? ‘I am sure you never
did any Thing willingly to offend me.’ 

‘No, Madam,’ answered he, ‘I would
die a thousand Times, before I would
have ventured it in the smallest Matter. 
But—I cannot speak—and yet I must. 
You cannot pardon me, and yet perhaps
as I am a dying Man, and never shall see
you more. —Indeed, if I was to live
after this Discovery, I should never dare
to look you in the Face again—and
yet, Madam, to think I shall never see
you more is worse than ten thousand
Deaths.’ 
‘Indeed, Mr. Atkinson,’ cries Amelia,
blushing, and looking down on the Floor,
‘I must not hear you talk in this manner. 
If you have any thing to say, tell it me,
and do not be afraid of my Anger; for I
think I may promise to forgive whatever
it was possible you should do.’ 
‘Here then, Madam,’ said he, ‘is your
Picture, I stole it when I was eighteen
Years of Age, and have kept it ever
since. It is set in Gold, with three little
Diamonds; and yet I can truly say, it
was not the Gold nor the Diamonds
which I stole—it was that Face which,
if I had been the Emperor of the World—’ 

‘I must not hear any more of this;’ 
said she,—‘comfort yourself, Joe, and
think no more of this Matter. Be assured
I freely and heartily forgive you— 
But pray compose yourself; come, let
me call in your Wife.—’ 
‘First, Madam, let me beg one Favour’ 
—cried he, ‘consider it is the last,
and then I shall die in Peace—let me
kiss that Hand before I die.’ 
‘Well, nay,’ says she, ‘I don't know
what I am doing—well—there—she then
carelesly gave him her Hand, which
he put gently to his Lips, and then
presently let it drop and fell back in the
Bed.’ 
Amelia now summoned Mrs. Atkinson,
who was indeed no further off than
just without the Door. She then hastened
down Stairs and called for a great Glass
of Water, which having drank off, she
threw herself into a Chair, and the Tears
ran plentifully from her Eyes with Compassion
for the poor Wretch she had just
left in his Bed. 

To say the Truth, without any Injury
to her Chastity, that Heart which had stood
firm as a Rock to all the Attacks of Title
and Equipage, of Finery and Flattery, and
which all the Treasures of the Universe
could not have purchased, was yet a little
softened by the plain, honest, modest, involuntary,
delicate, heroic Passion of this
poor and humble Swain; for whom, in
spite of herself, she felt a momentary Tenderness
and Complacence, at which Booth,
if he had known it, would perhaps have
been displeased. 
Having staid some Time in the Parlour,
and not finding Mrs. Atkinson come down,
(for indeed her Husband was then so bad
she could not quit him) Amelia left a
Message with the Maid of the House for
her Mistress, purporting that she should
be ready to do any thing in her Power to
serve her, and then left the House with a
Confusion on her Mind that she had never
felt before, and which any Chastity that
is not hewn out of Marble must feel on
so tender and delicate an Occasion. 




In which Mr. Booth meets with more than
one Adventure. 
Booth having hunted about for two
Hours at last saw a young Lady in a
tattered Silk Gown, stepping out of a
Shop in Monmouth-Street into a Hackney
Coach. This Lady, notwithstanding the
Disguise of her Dress, he presently discovered
to be no other than little Betty. 
He instantly gave the Alarm of stop
Thief, stop Coach; Upon which, Mrs.
Betty was immediately stopt in her Vehicle,
and Booth and his Myrmidons laid hold
of her. 
The Girl no sooner found that she was
seised by her Master, than the Consciousness
of her Guilt overpowered her; for she
was not yet an experienced Offender, and
she immediately confessed her Crime. 
She was then carried before a Justice of
Peace, where she was searched, and there
was found in her Possession four Shillings
and Sixpence in Money, besides the Silk 

Gown, which was indeed proper Furniture
for Rag Fair, and scarce worth a
single Farthing, though the honest Shopkeeper
in Monmouth-Street had sold it for
a Crown to this simple Girl. 
The Girl being examined by the Magistrate,
spoke as follows: ‘Indeed, Sir,
an't please your Worship, I am very
sorry for what I have done; and to be
sure, an't please your Honour, my Lord,
it must have been the Devil that put me
upon it; for to be sure, please your
Majesty, I never thought upon such a
Thing in my whole Life before, any
more than I did of my dying Day; but
indeed, Sir, an't please your Worship.—’ 
She was running on in this Manner when
the Justice interrupted her, and desir'd her to
give an Account what she had taken from
her Master, and what she had done with it. 
‘Indeed, an't please your Majesty,’ 
said she, ‘I took no more than two Shifts
of Madam's, and I pawned them for five
Shillings, which I gave for the Gown
that's upon my Back; and as for the
Money in my Pocket, it is every Farthing
of it my own. I am sure I intended to 

carry back the Shifts too as soon as ever
I could get Money to take them out.’ 
The Girl having told them where the
Pawnbroker lived, the Justice sent to
him, to produce the Shifts, which he presently
did; for he expected that a Warrant
to search his House would be the
Consequence of his Refusal. 
The Shifts being produced, on which
the honest Pownbroker had lent five Shillings,
appeared plainly to be worth above
thirty, indeed when new they had cost
much more. So that by their Goodness,
as well as by their Size, it was certain they
could not have belonged to the Girl. 
Booth grew very warm against the Pawnbroker. 
‘I hope, Sir,’ said he to the Justice,
‘there is some Punishment for this
Fellow likewise, who so plainly appears
to have known that these Goods were
stolen. The Shops of these Fellows may
indeed be called the Fountains of Theft: 
For it is in reality the Encouragement
which they meet with from these Receivers
of their Goods that induces Men very often
to become Thieves, so that these deserve 

equal, if not severer Punishment
than the Thieves themselves.’ 
The Pawnbroker protested his Innocence. 
And denied the taking in the Shifts. Indeed
in this he spoke Truth; for he had slipt
into an inner Room, as was always his
Custom on these Occasions, and left a little
Boy to do the Business; by which Means
he had carried on the Trade of receiving stolen
Goods for many Years with Impunity,
and had been twice acquitted at the Old-Baily,
though the Juggle appeared upon
the most manifest Evidence. 
As the Justice was going to speak he
was interrupted by the Girl, who falling
upon her Knees to Booth with many Tears,
begged his Forgiveness. 
‘Indeed, Betty,’ cries Booth, ‘you do
not deserve Forgiveness; for you know
very good Reasons why you should not
have thought of robbing your Mistress,
particularly at this Time. And what
further Aggravates your Crime is, that
you have robbed the best and kindest
Mistress in the World. Nay, you are
not only guilty of Felony, but of a felonious
Breach of Trust; for you know 

very well every thing your Mistress had,
was intrusted to your Care.’ 
Now it happened by very great Accident
that the Justice before whom the Girl
was brought, understood the Law. Turning
therefore to Booth he said, ‘Do you
say, Sir, that this Girl was intrusted with
the Shifts?’ 
‘Yes, Sir,’ said Booth, ‘she was intrusted
with every thing?’ 
‘And will you swear that the Goods
stolen,’ said the Justice, ‘are worth forty
Shillings?’ 
‘No indeed, Sir, answered Booth, nor
that they are worth thirty either.’ 
‘Then, Sir, cries the Justice, the Girl
cannot be guilty of Felony.’ 
‘How, Sir,’ said Booth, ‘is it not a
Breach of Trust? And is not a Breach of
Trust Felony, and the worst Felony too?’ 
‘No, Sir,’ answered the Justice, ‘a
Breach of Trust is no Crime in our Law,
unless it be in a Servant; and then the 

Act of Parliament requires the Goods
taken to be of the Value of forty Shillings.’ 
‘So then a Servant,’ cries Booth, ‘may
rob his Master of thirty-nine Shillings
whenever he pleases, and he can't be
punished.’ 
‘If the Goods are under his Care, he
can't,’ cries the Justice. 
‘I ask your Pardon, Sir,’ says Booth. 
‘I do not doubt what you say; but sure
this is a very extraordinary Law.’ 
‘Perhaps I think so too,’ said the Justice; 
‘but it belongs not to my Office
to make or to mend Laws. My Business
is only to execute them. If therefore
the Case be as you say, I must discharge
the Girl.’ 
‘I hope however, you will punish the
Pawnbroker,’ cries Booth. 
‘If the Girl is discharged,’ cries the
Justice, ‘so must be the Pawnbroker: For
if the Goods are not stolen, he cannot be
guilty of receiving them, knowing them 

to be stolen. And besides as to his Offence,
to say the Truth, I am almost
weary of prosecuting it; for such are the
Difficulties laid in the Way of this Prosecution,
that it is almost impossible to
convict any one on it. And to speak my
Opinion plainly, such are the Laws, and
such the Method of Proceeding, that one
would almost think our Laws were rather
made for the Protection of Rogues,
than for the Punishment of them.’ 
Thus ended this Examination; the
Thief and the Receiver went about their
Business, and Booth departed, in order to
go home to his Wife. 
In his Way home, Booth was met by a
Lady in a Chair; who, immediately upon
seeing him, stopt her Chair, bolted out of
it, and going directly up to him, said: 
‘So, Mr. Booth, you have kept your Word
with me.’ 
This Lady was no other than Miss Mathews,
and the Speech she meant was of a
Promise made to her at the Masquerade,
of visiting her within a Day or two; 
which whether he ever intended to keep I
cannot say, but in Truth the several Accidents 

that had since happened to him,
had so discomposed his Mind, that he had
absolutely forgot it. 
Booth however was too sensible, and too
well bred, to make the Excuse of Forgetfulness
to a Lady; nor could he readily
find any other. While he stood therefore
hesitating, and looking not over wise, Miss
Mathews said: ‘Well, Sir, since by your
Confusion I see you have some Grace
left, I will pardon you on one Condition,
and that is, that you will sup with
me this Night. But if you fail me now,
expect all the Revenge of an injured
Woman.’ She then bound herself by a
most outrageous Oath, that she would
complain to his Wife—‘And I am sure,’ 
says she, ‘she is so much a Woman of
Honour, as to do me Justice. —And tho'
I miscarried in my first Attempt, be assured
I will take Care of my second.’ 
Booth asked what she meant by her first
Attempt; to which she answered, that she
had already writ his Wife an Account of
his ill Usage of her, but that she was
pleased it had miscarried. She then repeated
her Asseverations, that she would
now do it effectually if he disappointed
her. 

This Threat she reckoned would most
certainly terrify poor Booth; and indeed
she was not mistaken; for I believe it
would have been impossible, by any other
Menace, or by any other Means, to have
brought him once even to balance in his
Mind on this Question. But by this Threat
she prevailed; and Booth promised, upon
his Word and Honour, to come to her at
the Hour she appointed. After which she
took Leave of him with a Squeeze by the
Hand, and a smiling Countenance, and
walked back to her Chair. 
But however she might be pleased with
having obtained this Promise, Booth was
far from being delighted with the Thoughts
of having given it. He looked indeed upon
the Consequences of this Meeting with
Horrour; but as to the Consequence which
was so apparently intended by the Lady,
he resolved against it. At length he came
to this Determination; to go according to
his Appointment, to argue the Matter with
the Lady, and to convince her, if possible,
that from a regard to his Honour only,
he must discontinue her Acquaintance. If
this failed to satisfy her, and she still persisted
in her Threats to acquaint his Wife with 

the Affair, he then resolved, whatever
Pains it cost him, to communicate the
whole Truth himself to Amelia, from whose
Goodness he doubted not but to obtain
an absolute Remission. 



In which Amelia appears in a Light more
amiable than gay. 
We will now return to Amelia, whom
we left in some Perturbation of
Mind departing from Mrs. Atkinson. 
Though she had before walked through
the Streets in a very improper Dress with
Mrs. Atkinson, she was unwilling, especially
as she was alone, to return in the same
Manner. Indeed she was scarce able to
walk in her present Condition; for the Case
of poor Atkinson had much affected her
tender Heart, and her Eyes had overflown
with many Tears. 
It occurred likewise to her at present,
that she had not a single Shilling in her
Pocket, or at home, to provide Food for
herself and her Family. In this Situation
she resolved to go immediately to the Gentleman 

recommended to her by the Register-Office,
and to deposite her Picture
for what she could raise upon it. She then
immediately took a Chair, and put her
Design in Execution. 
The intrinsic Value of the Gold, in which
this Picture was set, and of the little Diamonds
which surrounded it, amounted to
nine Guineas. This therefore was advanced
to her, and the prettiest Face in the World
(such is often the Fate of Beauty) was deposited,
as of no Value into the Bargain. 
When she came home, she found the
following Letter from Mrs. Atkinson. 

‘My dearest Madam,
As I know your Goodness, I could
not delay a Moment acquainting you
with the happy Turn of my Affairs since
you went. The great Doctor, who before
attended the Captain, having given
him over, I was advised to send for a
Gentleman, of whom a Friend of the
Captain's gives me the greatest Character; 
though my Apothecary says he kills
every one he comes near. This Gentleman,
the Moment he came, assured me
my Husband, the Captain, was on the 

recovery, and in very little Danger; and
I really think he is since mended. I
hope to wait on you soon with better
News; for I really think the true Machaon,
of whom Homer speaks so greatly,
is come to the Captain's Assistance. Heavens
bless you, dear Madam, and believe
me to be, with the utmost Sincerity,’ 
‘Your most obliged,
obedient humble Servant,
Atkinson.’ 
Amelia was really pleased with this Letter; 
and now it being past Four o'Clock,
she despaired of seeing the Captain till the
Evening. She therefore provided some
Tarts for her Children, and then eating
nothing but a Slice of Bread and Butter
herself, she began to prepare for her Husband's
Supper. 
There were two Things of which her
Husband was particularly fond, which,
though it may bring the Simplicity of his
Taste into great Contempt with some of
my Readers, I will venture to name. These
were a Fowl and Egg Sauce, and Mutton
Broth; both which Amelia immediately
purchased. 

As soon as the Clock struck seven, the
good Creature went down into the Kitchin,
and began to exercise her Talents of
Cookery, of which she was a great Mistress,
as she was of every Œconomical
Office, from the highest to the lowest; 
and as no Woman could outshine her in a
Drawing-Room, so none could make the
Drawing-Room itself shine brighter than
Amelia. And if I may speak a bold Truth,
I question whether it be possible to view
this fine Creature in a more amiable Light,
than while she was dressing her Husband's
Supper with her little Children playing
round her. 
It was now half an Hour past Eight,
and the Meat almost ready, the Table likewise
neatly spread with Materials, borrowed from
her Landlady, and she began to grow a
little uneasy at Booth's not returning; when
a sudden Knock at the Door roused her
Spirits, and she cried, ‘There, my Dear,
there is your good Papa;’ at which
Words she darted swiftly up Stairs, and
opened the Door to her Husband. 
She desired her Husband to walk up into
the Dining-Room, and she would come to 

him in an Instant; for she was desirous to
encrease his Pleasure, by surprising him
with his two favourite Dishes. She then
went down again to the Kitchin, where
the Maid of the House undertook to send
up the Supper, and she with her Children
returned to Booth. 
He then told her concisely what had
happened, with relation to the Girl—To
which she scarce made any Answer; but
asked him if he had not dined. He assured
her he had not eat a Morsel the whole
Day. ‘Well,’ says she, ‘my Dear, I am
a Fellow-sufferer; but we shall both enjoy
our Supper the more: For I have
made a little Provision for you, as I
guessed what might be the Case. I have
got you a Bottle of Wine too. And
here is a clean Cloth and a smiling Countenance,
my dear Will. Indeed I am in
unusual good Spirits To-night, and I
have made a Promise to the Children,
which you must confirm; I have promised
to let them sit up this one Night
to Supper with us. —Nay, don't look
so serious; cast off all uneasy Thoughts
—I have a Present for you here—No
Matter how I came by it.’ —At which
Words she put eight Guineas into his 

Hand, crying: ‘Come, my dear Bill,
be gay—Fortune will yet be kind to us— 
at least let us be happy this Night. Indeed
the Pleasures of many Women,
during their whole Lives, will not amount
to my Happiness this Night, if you will
be in good Humour.’ 
Booth fetched a deep Sigh, and cried— 
‘How unhappy am I, my Dear, that I
can't sup with you To-night!’ 
As in the delighful Month of June, when
the Sky is all serene, and the whole Face
of Nature looks with a pleased and smiling
Aspect, suddenly a dark Cloud spreads itself
over the Hemisphere, the Sun vanishes
from our Sight, and every Object is obscured
by a dark and horrid Gloom. So
happened it to Amelia; the Joy that had enlightened
every Feature disappeared in a
Moment; the Lustre forsook her shining
Eyes; and all the little Loves, that played
and wantoned in her Cheeks, hung their
drooping Heads, and with a faint trembling
Voice she repeated her Husband's
Words: ‘Not sup with me to Night,
my Dear!’ 

‘Indeed, my Dear,’ answered he, ‘I
cannot. I need not tell you how uneasy
it makes me, or that I am as much disappointed
as yourself; but I am engaged
to sup abroad. I have absolutely given
my Honour; and besides, it is on Business
of Importance.’ 
‘My Dear,’ said she, ‘I say no more. 
I am convinced you would not willingly
sup from me. I own it is a very particular
Disappointment to me to Night,
when I had proposed unusual Pleasure; 
but the same Reason which is sufficient
to you, ought to be so to me.’ 
Booth made his Wife a Compliment on
her ready Compliance, and then asked her,
what she intended by giving him that
Money, or how she came by it. 
‘I intend, my Dear,’ said she, ‘to
give it you; that is all. As to the Manner
in which I came by it, you know,
Billy, that is not very material. You
are well assured I got it by no Means
which would displease you; and perhaps
another Time I may tell you.’ 

Booth asked no farther Questions; but
he returned her, and insisted on her taking
all but one Guinea, saying she was the
safest Treasurer. He then promised her to
make all the Haste home in his Power,
and he hoped, he said, to be with her in an
Hour and Half at farthest, and then took
his Leave. 
When he was gone, the poor disappointed
Amelia sat down to Supper with her Children; 
with whose Company she was forced
to console herself for the Absence of her
Husband. 



A very tragic Scene. 
The Clock had struck Eleven, and
Amelia was just proceeding to put
her Children to Bed, when she heard a
Knock at the Street Door. Upon which
the Boy cried out, ‘There's Papa, Mamma,
pray let me stay and see him before I
go to Bed.’ This was a Favour very
easily obtained; for Amelia instantly ran
down Stairs, exulting in the Goodness of
her Husband for returning so soon, though 

Half an Hour was already elapsed beyond
the Time in which he promised to
return. 
Poor Amelia was now again disappointed; 
for it was not her Husband at the Door,
but a Servant with a Letter for him, which
he delivered into her Hands. She immediately
returned up Stairs, and said—‘It
was not your Papa, my Dear; but I
hope it is one who hath brought us some
good News.’ For Booth had told her,
that he hourly expected to receive such
from the great Man, and had desired her
to open any Letter which came to him in
his Absence. 
Amelia therefore broke open the Letter,
and read as follows. 

‘SIR,
After what hath past between us, I
need only tell you that I know you supped
this very Night alone with Miss
Mathews: a Fact which will upbraid
you sufficiently, without putting me to
that Trouble; and will very well account
for my desiring the Favour of seeing you
To-morrow in Hide-Park at Six in the
Morning. You will forgive me reminding 

you once more how inexcusable this
Behaviour is in you who are possessed in
your own Wife of the most inestimable
Jewel.’ 
‘Yours, &c.
T. James.’ 
‘I shall bring Pistols with me.’ 
It is not easy to describe the Agitation of
Amelia's Mind when she read this Letter. 
She threw herself into her Chair, turned as
pale as Death, began to tremble all over,
and had just Power enough left to tap the
Bottle of Wine, which she had hitherto
preserved entire for her Husband, and to
drink off a large Bumper. 
The little Boy perceived the strange
Symptoms which appeared in his Mother; 
and running to her, he cried, ‘What's the
Matter, my dear Mamma, you don't
look well? —No Harm hath happened to
poor Papa, I hope—Sure that bad Man
hath not carried him away again.’ 
Amelia answered, ‘No, Child, nothing
—nothing at all.’ —And then a large
Shower of Tears came to her Assistance; 
which presently after produced the same in
the Eyes of both the Children. 

Amelia, after a short Silence, looking
tenderly at her Children, cry'd out, ‘It
is too much, too much to bear. Why
did I bring these little Wretches into
the World! Why were these Innocents
born to such a Fate!’ —She then threw
her Arms round them both, (for they were
before embracing her Knees) and cried,
‘O my Children! my Children! Forgive
me, my Babes—Forgive me that I have
brought you into such a World as this. 
You are undone—my Children are undone.’ 
The little Boy answered with great Spirit,
‘How undone, Mamma? My Sister and
I don't care a Farthing for being undone
—Don't cry so upon our Accounts—we
are both very well; indeed we are— 
But do pray tell us. I am sure some
Accident hath happened to poor Papa.’ 
‘Mention him no more,’ cries Amelia— 
‘your Papa is—indeed he is a wicked
Man—he cares not for any of us—O
Heavens, is this the Happiness I promised
myself this Evening!’ —At which
Words she fell into an Agony, holding
both her Children in her Arms. 

The Maid of the House now entered
the Room, with a Letter in her Hand,
which she had received from a Porter,
whose Arrival the Reader will not wonder
to have been unheard by Amelia in her
present Condition. 
The Maid, upon her Entrance into the
Room, perceiving the Situation of Amelia,
cried out, ‘Good Heavens! Madam,
what's the Matter?’ Upon which Amelia,
who had a little recovered herself after the
last violent Vent of her Passion, started up
and cried—‘Nothing, Mrs. Susan—nothing
extraordinary. I am subject to these
Fits sometimes; but I am very well
now. Come, my dear Children, I am
very well again; indeed I am. You
must now go to Bed; Mrs. Susan will
be so good as to put you to Bed.’ 
‘But why doth not Papa love us?’ 
cries little Boy, ‘I am sure we have
none of us done any Thing to disoblige
him.’ 
This innocent Question of the Child so
stung Amelia, that she had the utmost Difficulty
to prevent a Relapse. However 

she took another Dram of Wine; for so
it might be called to her, who was the
most temperate of Women, and never
exceeded three Glasses on any Occasion. 
In this Glass she drank her Children's
Health, and soon after so well soothed,
and composed them, that they went quietly
away with Mrs. Susan. 
The Maid, in the Shock she had conceived
at the melancholy, indeed frightful
Scene, which had presented itself to her
at her first coming into the Room, had
quite forgot the Letter, which she held in
her Hand. However, just at her Departure,
she recollected it, and delivered it to
Amelia; who was no sooner alone, than
she opened it, and read as follows. 

‘My dearest sweetest Love,
I write this from the Bailiff's House,
where I was formerly, and to which I
am again brought at the Suit of that
Villain, Trent. I have the Misfortune
to think I owe this Accident (I mean
that it happened to Night) to my own
Folly, in endeavouring to keep a Secret
from you—O my Dear, had I had Resolution
to confess my Crime to you, your
Forgiveness would, I am convinced, 

have cost me only a few Blushes, and I
had now been happy in your Arms. 
Fool that I was to leave you on such
an Account, and to add to a former
Transgression a new one. —Yet by Heavens
I mean not a Transgression of the
like kind; for of that I am not, nor
ever will be guilty; and when you know
the true Reason of my leaving you Tonight,
I think you will pity, rather than
upbraid me. I am sure you would, if
you knew the Compunction with which
I left you to go to the most worthless,
the most infamous—Do guess the
rest—Guess that Crime with which I
cannot stain my Paper—but still believe
me no more guilty than I am—or, if it
will lessen your Vexation at what hath
befallen me, believe me as guilty as you
please, and think me, for a while at least,
as undeserving of you, as I think myself. 
This Paper and Pen are so bad, I
question whether you can read what I
write. I almost doubt whether I wish you
should. Yet this I will endeavour to
make as legible as I can—Be comforted,
my dear Love, and still keep up
your Spirits with the Hopes of better
Days. The Doctor will be in Town Tomorrow,
and I trust on his Goodness for 

my Delivery once more from this Place,
and that I shall soon be able to repay
him. That Heaven may bless and preserve
you, is the Prayer of,’ 
‘My dearest Love,
Your ever fond affectionate,
and hereafter, faithful Husband,
W. Booth.’ 
Amelia pretty well guessed the obscure
Meaning of this Letter, which though at
another Time it might have given her unspeakable
Torment, was at present rather
of the medicinal Kind, and served to allay
her Anguish. Her Anger to Booth too
began a little to abate, and was softened
by her Concern for his Misfortune. Upon
the whole, however, she past a miserable
and sleepless Night, her gentle Mind
torn and distracted with various and contending
Passions, distressed with Doubts,
and wandring in a kind of Twilight, which
presented her only Objects of different Degrees
of Horrour, and where black Despair
closed at a small Distance the gloomy
Prospect. 