


In which Mrs. Heartfree continues
the Relation of her Adventures. 
“The first Evening after we were aboard
this Vessel, which was a Brigantine,
we being then at a little Distance
from the Madeiras, the most violent
Storm arose from the North-West, in
which we presently lost both our Masts; 
and indeed Death now presented itself as
inevitable to us—I need not tell my
Tommy what were then my Thoughts. 
Our Danger was so great, that the Captain
of the Ship, a professed Atheist, betook 

himself to Prayers, and the whole
Crew, abandoning themselves for lost, fell
with the utmost Eagerness to the emptying
a Cask of Brandy, not one Drop of which,
they swore, should be polluted with Salt
Water. I observed here, my old Friend displayed
less Courage than I expected from
him. He seemed entirely swallowed up
in Despair. But Heaven, be praised,
we were all at last preserved! The
Storm, after about eleven Hours Continuance
began to abate, and by Degrees
entirely ceased; but left us still rolling
at the Mercy of the Waves, which carried
us at their own Pleasure to the South-East,
a vast Number of Leagues. Our
Crew were all dead drunk with the
Brandy which they had taken such Care
to preserve from the Sea; but, indeed,
had they been awake, their Labour would
have been of very little Service, as we had
lost all our Rigging; our Brigantine being
reduced to a naked Hulk only. In
this Condition we floated above thirty
Hours, till in the midst of a very dark
Night we spied a Light, which seeming
to approach us, grew so large, that our 

Sailors concluded it to be the Lanthorn
of a Man of War; but when we were
cheering ourselves with the Hopes of our
Deliverance from this wretched Situation,
on a sudden, to our great Concern, the Light
entirely disappeared and left us in a Despair,
encreased by those pleasing Imaginations
with which we had entertained
our Minds during its Appearance. The
rest of the Night we passed in melancholy
Conjectures on the Light which
had deserted us, which the major Part
of the Sailors concluded to be a Meteor. 
In this Distress we had one Comfort,
which was a plentiful Store of Provision: 
This so supported the Spirits of the Sailors,
that they declared, had they but a
sufficient Quantity of Brandy, they cared
not whether they saw Land for a Month
to come; but indeed, we were much nearer
it than we imagined, as we perceived at
Break of Day: One of the most knowing
of the Crew, declared we were near
the Continent of Africa; but when we
were within three Leagues of it, a second
violent Storm arose from the North, so
that we again gave over all Hopes of 

Safety. This Storm was not quite so
outragious as the former, but of much
longer Continuance, for it lasted near
three Days; and drove us an immense
Number of Leagues to the South. We
were within a League of the Shore, expecting
every Moment our Ship to be
dashed in Pieces, when the Tempest
ceased all of a sudden; but the Waves still
continued to roll like Mountains, and before
the Sea recovered its calm Motion,
our Ship was thrown so near the Land,
that the Captain ordered out his Boat,
declaring he had scarce any Hopes of
saving her; and, indeed, we had not
quitted her many Minutes, before we
saw the Justice of his Apprehensions; 
for she struck against a Rock, and immediately
sunk. The Behaviour of the
Sailors on this Occasion very much affected
me, they beheld their Ship perish
with the Tenderness of a Lover or a
Parent, they spoke of her as the fondest
Husband would of his Wife; and many
of them, who seemed to have no Tears
in their Composition, shed them plentifully
at her sinking. The Captain himself 

cried out, Go thy Ways, charming
Molly, the Sea never devoured a lovelier
Morsel. If I have fifty Vessels, I shall never
love another like thee. Poor Slut! 
I shall remember thee to my dying Day. 
—Well, the Boat now conveyed us
all safe to Shore, where we landed with
very little Difficulty. It was now about
Noon, and the Rays of the Sun,
which descended almost perpendicular
on our Heads, were extremely hot and
troublesome. However, we travelled
through this extreme Heat about five
Miles over a Plain. This brought us to
a vast Wood, which extended itself as
far as we could see both to the right and
left, and seemed to me to put an entire
End to our Progress. Here we decreed to
rest and dine on the Provision which
we had brought from the Ship, of which
we had sufficient for very few Meals; 
our Boat being so over loaded with People,
that we had very little Room for
Luggage of any Kind. Our Repast was
salt Pork broiled, which the Keenness of
Hunger made so delicious to my Companions,
that they fed very heartily upon 

it. As for myself, the Fatigue of my
Body and the Vexation of my Mind
had so thoroughly weakned me, that I
was almost entirely deprived of Appetite; 
and the utmost Dexterity of the most accomplished
French Cook would have
been ineffectual, had he endeavoured to
tempt me with Delicacies. I thought
myself very little a Gainer by my late
Escape from the Tempest, by which I
seemed only to have exchanged the Element
in which I was presently to die. 
When our Company had sufficiently,
and indeed very plentifully, feasted
themselves, they resolved to enter the
Wood and endeavour to pass it, in Expectation
of finding some Inhabitants, at
least Provision; for the Plain which lay
between the Wood and the Sea was extremely
barren, nor did it afford any other
Beast or Fowl than Sea Gulls. We proceeded
therefore in the following Order; 
one Man in the Front with a Hatchet to
clear our Way, and two others followed
him with Guns to protect the rest from
wild Beasts; then walked the rest of our
Company, and last of all the Captain 

himself, being armed likewise, with a
Gun to defend us from any Attack behind,
in the Rear, I think, you call it. 
And thus our whole Company, being
fourteen in Number, travelled on 'till
Night overtook us, without seeing any
thing, unless a few Birds, and some very
insignificant Animals. We rested all
Night under the Covert of some Trees,
and indeed we very little wanted Shelter
at that Season, the Heat in the Day
being the only Inclemency we had to
combat with in this Climate. I cannot
help telling you, my old Friend lay still
nearest to me on the Ground, and declared
he would be my Protector, should
any of the Sailors offer Rudeness; but I
can acquit them of any such Attempt; 
nor was I ever affronted by any one, more
than with a coarse Expression, proceeding
rather from the Roughness and Ignorance
of their Education, than from any
abandoned Principle, or want of Humanity.” 