


The Dead-Warrant arrives for
Heartfree; on which Occasion
Wild betrays some human Weakness. 
The Dead-Warrant, as it is called,
now came down to Newgate for the
Execution of Heartfree among the rest of
the Prisoners. And here the Reader must
excuse us, who profess to draw natural, not
perfect Characters, and to record the Truths
of History, not the Extravagancies of Romance,
while we relate a Weakness in
Wild, of which we are ourselves ashamed,
and which we would willingly have concealed,
could we have preserved at the
same Time that strict Attachment to Truth
and Impartiality, which we have vowed in
recording the Annals of this GREAT Man. 
Know then, Reader, that this Dead-Warrant
did not not affect Heartfree, who was
to suffer a shameful Death by it, with half
the Concern it gave Wild, who had been 

the Occasion of it. He had been a little
struck the Day before, on seeing the Children
carried away in Tears from their Father. 
This Sight brought the Remembrance
of some slight Injuries he had done
the Father, to his Mind, which he endeavoured,
as much as possible, to obliterate; 
but when one of the Keepers (I should say,
Lieutenants of the Castle) repeated Heartfree's
Name among those of the Malefactors
who were to suffer within a few
Days, the Blood forsook his Countenance,
and, in a cold still Stream, mov'd heavily to
his Heart, which had scarce Strength enough
left to return it through his Veins. 
In short, his Body so visibly demonstrated
the Pangs of his Mind, that, to escape Observation,
he retired to his Room, where
he sullenly gave vent to such bitter Agonies,
that even the injured Heartfree had
not the Apprehension of what his Wife
had suffered shut every Avenue of Compassion,
would have pitied him. 
When his Mind was thoroughly fatigued,
and worn out with the Horrours
which the approaching Fate of the poor 

Wretch, who lay under a Sentence, which
he had iniquitously brought upon him, had
suggested. Sleep promised him Relief; but
this Promise was, alas! delusive. This
certain Friend to the tired Body, is often
the severest Enemy to the oppressed Mind. 
So at least it proved to Wild, adding visionary
to real Horrours, and tormenting his
Imagination with Fantoms too dreadful to
be described. At length starting from
these Visions, he no sooner recovered his
waking Senses than he cry'd out: “I may
yet prevent this Catastrophe. It is not
too late to discover the whole.” He then
paused a Moment: But Greatness instantly
returning to his Assistance, checked the
base Thought, as it first offered itself to his
Mind. He then reasoned thus coolly with
himself: “Shall I, like a Child, or a Woman,
or one of those mean Wretches,
whom I have always despised, be frightened
by Dreams and visionary Phantoms,
to sully that Honour which I have so
difficulty acquired, and so gloriously
maintained! Shall I, to redeem the
worthless Life of this silly Fellow, suffer
my Reputation to contract a Stain, 

which the Blood of Millions cannot
wipe away! Was it only that the
few, the simple Part of Mankind,
should call me a Rogue, perhaps I could
submit; but to be for ever contemptible
to the PRIGS, as a Wretch who wanted
Spirit to execute my Undertaking,
can never be digested. What is the Life
of a single Man? Have not whole Armies
and Nations been sacrificed to the
Humour of ONE GREAT MAN? 
Nay, to omit that first Class of Greatness,
the Conquerors of Mankind, how
often have Numbers fallen, by a fictitious
Plot, only to satisfy the Spleen, or
perhaps exercise the Ingenuity of a
Member of that second Order of
Greatness the Ministerial! What have
I done then? Why, I have ruined a Family,
and brought an innocent Man to
the Gallows. I ought rather to weep,
with Alexander, that I have ruined no
more, than to regret the little I have
done.” He at length, therefore, bravely
resolved to consign over Heartfree to his
Fate, though it cost him more struggling
than may easily be believed, utterly 

to conquer his Reluctance, and to banish
away every Degree of Humanity from his
Mind, these little Sparks of which composed
one of those Weaknesses, which we lamented
in the opening of our History. 
But, in Vindication of our Hero, we
must beg Leave to observe, that Nature is
seldom so kind as those Writers who draw
Characters absolutely perfect. She seldom
creates any Man so completely GREAT, or
completely low, but that some Sparks of
Humanity will glimmer in the former, and
some Sparks of what the Vulgar call Evil,
will dart forth in the latter; utterly to
extinguish which will give some Pain
and Uneasiness to both; for I apprehend,
no Mind was ever yet formed entirely free
from Blemish, unless peradventure that of
a sanctified Hypocrite, whose Praises
a well-fed Flatterer hath gratefully thought
proper to sing forth. 