


Containing above two Days. 



A wonderful long Chapter concerning the
Marvellous; being much the longest of all
our introductory Chapters. 
As we are now entering upon a Book,
in which the Course of our History
will oblige us to relate some Matters
of a more strange and surprizing Kind than
any which have hitherto occurred, it may 

not be amiss in the prolegomenous, or introductory
Chapter, to say something of
that Species of Writing which is called the
Marvellous. To this we shall, as well for
the Sake of ourselves, as of others, endeavour
to set some certain Bounds; and indeed
nothing can be more necessary, as
Criticks *  of different Complexions are here
apt to run into very different Extremes; 
for while some are, with M. Dacier, ready
to allow, that the same Thing which is impossible
may be yet probable † , others have
so little Historic or Poetic Faith, that they
believe nothing be either possible or probable,
the like to which hath not occurred
to their own Observation. 
First then, I think, it may very reasonably
be required of every Writer, that he
keeps within the Bounds of Possibility; and
still remembers that what it is not possible
for Man to perform, it is scarce possible for
Man to balieve he did perform. This Conviction,
perhaps, gave Birth to many Stories
of the ancient Heathen Deities (for
most of them are of poetical Original). 

The Poet, being desirous to indulge a
wanton and extravagant Imagination, took
Refuge in that Power, of the Extent of
which his Readers were no Judges, or rather
which they imagined to be infinite,
and consequently they could not be shocked
at any Prodigies related of it. This hath been
strongly urged in Defence of Homer's Miracles; 
and it is, perhaps, a Defence; not, as
Mr. Pope would have it, because Ulysses told a
Set of foolish Lies to the Phæacians, who
were a very dull Nation; but because the
Poet himself wrote to Heathens, to whom
poetical Fables were Articles of Faith. For
my own Part, I must confess, so compassionate
is my Temper, I wish Polypheme had
confined himself to his Milk Diet, and preserved
his Eye; nor could Ulysses be much
more concerned than myself, when his
Companions were turned into Swine by
Circe, who shewed, think, afterwards,
too much Regard for Man's Flesh to be
supposed capable of converting it into Bacon. 
I wish, likewise, with all my Heart, that
Homer could have known the Rule prescribed
by Horace, to introduce supernatural
Agents as seldom as possible. We should
not then have seen his Gods coming on trivial
Errands, and often behaving themselves
so as not only to forfeit all. Title to 

Respect, but to become the Objects of Scorn
and Derision. A Conduct which must have
shocked the Credulity of a pious and sagacious
Heathen; and which could never
have been defended, unless by agreeing
with a Supposition to which I have been
sometimes almost inclined, that this most
glorious Poet, as he certainly was, had an
Intent to burlesque the superstitious Faith
of his own Age and Country. 
But I have rested too long on a Doctrine
which can be of no Use to a Christian
Writer: For as he cannot introduce into
his Works any of that heavenly Host which
make a Part of his Creed; so is it horrid
Puerility to search the Heathen Theology
for any of those Deities who have been long
since dethroned from their Immortality. 
Lord Shaftesbury observes, that nothing is
more cold than the Invocation of a Muse
by a Modern; he might have added that
nothing can be more absurd. A modern may
with much more Elegance invoke a Ballad, as
some have thought Homer did, or a Mug of
Ale with the Author of Hudibras; which
latter may perhaps have inspired much more
Poetry as well as Prose, than all the Liquors
of Hippocrene or Helicon. 

The only supernatural Agents which can
in any Manner be allowed to us Moderns
are Ghosts; but of these I would advise an
Author to be extremely sparing. These are
indeed like Arsenic, and other dangerous
Drugs in Physic, to be used with the utmost
Caution; nor would I advise the Introduction
of them at all in those Works,
or by those Authors to which, or to whom
a Horse-Laugh in the Reader, would be
any great Prejudice or Mortification. 
As for Elves and Fairies, and other such
Mummery, I purposely omit the Mention of
them, as I should be very unwilling to confine
within any Bounds those surprizing
Imaginations, for whose vast Capacity the
Limits of human Nature are too narrow; 
whose Works are to be considered as a new
Creation; and who have consequently just
Right to do what they will with their
own. 
Man therefore is the highest Subject (unless
on very extraordinary Occasions indeed)
which presents itself to the Pen of our Historian,
or of our Poet;and in relating his
Actions, great Care is to be taken, that we 

do not exceed the Capacity of the Agent we
describe. 
Nor is Possibility alone sufficient to justify
us, we must keep likewise within the Rules
of Probability. It is, I think, the Opinion
of Aristotle; or if not, it is the Opinion of
some wise Man, whose Authority will be as
weighty, when it is as old; ‘that it is no
Excuse for a Poet who relates what is incredible,
that the thing related is really
Matter of Fact.’ This may perhaps be allowed
true with regard to Poetry, but it
may be thought impracticable to extend it
to the Historian: For he is obliged to record
Matters as he finds them; though
they may be of so extraordinary a Nature, as
will require no small Degree of historical
Faith to swallow them. Such was the successless
Armament of Xerxes, described by
Herodotus, or the successful Expedition of
Alexander related by Arrian. Such of later
Years was the Victory of Agincourt obtained
by Harry the Fifth, or that of Narva,
won by Charles the Twelfth of Sweden. All
which Instances, the more we reflect on
them, appear still the more astonishing. 
Such Facts, however, as they occur in
the Thread of the Story; nay, indeed, as 

they constitute the essential Parts of it, the
Historian is not only justifiable in recording
as they really happened; but indeed would
be unpardonable, should he omit or alter
them. But there are other Facts not of such
Consequence nor so necessary, which tho'
ever so well attested, may nevertheless be sacrificed
to Oblivion in Complaisance to
the Scepticism of a Reader. Such is that
memorable Story of the Ghost of George Villers,
which might with more Propriety have
been made a Present of to Dr. Drelincourt,
to have kept the Ghost of Mrs. Veale Company,
at the Head of his Discourse upon
Death, than have been introduced into so
solemn a Work as the History of the Rebellion. 
To say the Truth, if the Historian will
confine himself to what really happened, and
utterly reject any Circumstance, which,
tho' never so well attested, he must be
well assured is false, he will sometimes fall
into the Marvellous, but never into the Incredible. 
He will often raise the Wonder
and Surprize of his Read, but never that
incredulous Hatred mentioned by Horace. 
It is by falling into Fiction therefore, that
we generally offend against this Rule, of
deserting Probability, which the Historian 

seldom if ever quits, till he forsakes his Character,
and commences a Writer of Romance. 
In this, however, those Historians
who relate publick Transactions, have the
Advantage of us who confine ourselves to
Scenes of private Life. The Credit of the
former is by common Notoriety supported
for a long Time; and public Records, with
the concurrent Testimony of many Authors
bear Evidence to their Truth in
future Ages. Thus a Trajan and an
Antoninus, a Nero and a Caligula, have all
met with the Belief of Posterity; and no one
doubts but that Men so very good, and so
very bad, were once the Masters of Mankind. 
But we who deal in private Characters,
who search into the most retired Recesses,
and draw forth Examples of Virtue and
Vice, from Holes and Corners of the World,
are in a more dangerous Situation. As we
have no publick Notoriety, no concurrent
Testimony, no Records to support and corroborate
what we deliver, it becomes us not
only to keep within the Limits of Possibility,
but of Probability too; and this more
especially in painting what is greatly good
and amiable. Knavery and Folly, though
never so exorbitant, will more easily, meet 

with Assent: for Ill-nature adds great Support
and Strength to Faith. 
Thus we may, perhaps, with little Danger
relate the History of a Fisher; who
having long owed his Bread to the Generosity
of Mr. Derby, and having that very
Morning received a considerable Bounty from
his Hands, in order to possess himself what
remained in his Friend's Scrutore, concealed
himself in a public Office of the Temple,
through which there was a Passage into Mr.
Derby's Chambers. Here he overheard
Mr. Derby for many Hours solacing himself
at an Entertainment which he that Evening
gave his Friends, and to which Fisher had
been invited. During all this Time, no
tender, no grateful Reflections arose to restrain
his Purpose; but when the poor Gentleman
had let his Company out through the
Office, Fisher came suddenly from his lurking
Place, and walking softly behind his
Friend into his Chamber, discharged a Pistol
Ball into his Head. This may be believed,
when the Bones of Fisher are as rotten
as his Heart. Nay, perhaps, it will be
credited that the Villain went two Days afterwards
with some young Ladies to the
Play of Hamlet; and with an unaltered Countenance 

heard one of the Ladies, who little
suspected how near she was to the Person,
cry out, Good God! if the Man that murdered
Mr. Derby was now present! Manifesting
in this a more seared and callous
Conscience than even Nero himself; of whom
we are told by Suetonius, ‘that the Consciousness
of his Guilt after the Death of his
Mother became immediately intolerable,
and so continued; nor could all the Congratulations
of the Soldiers; of the Senate,
and the People, allay the Horrors of his
Conscience.’ 
But now, on the other hand, should I
tell my Reader, that I had known a Man
whose penetrating Genius had enabled him
to raise a large Fortune in a Way where no
Beginning was chaulked out to him: That
he had done this with the most perfect Preservation
of his Integrity, and not only without
the least Injustice or Injury to any one
individual Person, but with the highest Advantage
to Trade, and a vast Increase of
the public Revenue: That he had expended
one Part of the Income of this Fortune in
discovering a Taste superior to most, by
Works where the highest Dignity, was united
with the purest Simplicity, and another 

Part in displaying a Degree of Goodness superior
to all Men, by Acts of Charity to
Objects whose only Recommendations were
their Merits, or their Wants: That he was
most industrious in searching after Merit in
Distress, most eager to relieve it, and then
as careful (perhaps too careful) to conceal
what he had done: That his House, his
Furniture, his Gardens, his Table, his private
Hospitality, and his public Beneficence
all denoted the Mind from which they
flowed, and were all intrinsically rich and
noble, without Tinsel, or external Ostentation: 
That he filled every Relation in
Life with the most adequate Virtue: That
he was most piously religious to his Creator,
most zealously loyal to his Sovereign; a
most tender Husband to his Wife, a kind
Relation, a munificent Patron, a warm and
firm Friend, a knowing and a chearful Companion,
indulgent to his Servants, hospitable
to his Neighbours, charitable to the
Poor, and benevolent to all Mankind. 
Should I add to these the Epithets of wise,
brave, elegant, and indeed every other amiable
Epithet in our Language, I might surely
say, 

—Quis credet? nemo Hercule! nemo;
Vel duo, vel nemo.

And yet I know a Man who is all I have
here described. But a single Instance (and
I really know not such another) is not sufficient
to justify us, while we are writing
to thousands who never heard of the
Person, nor of any thing like him. 
Such Raræe Aves should be remitted to
the Epitaph-Writer, or to some Poet,
who may condescend to hitch him in a
Distich, or to slide him into a Rhime
with an Air of Carelesness and Neglect,
without giving any Offence to the
Reader. 
In the last Place, the Actions should
be such as may not only be within the
Compass of human Agency, and which
human Agents may probably be supposed
to do; but they should be likely
for the very Actors and Characters themselves
to have performed: For what may
be only wonderful and surprizing in
one Man, may become improbable, or
indeed impossible, when related of another. 
This last Requisite is what the dramatic
Critics call Conservation of Character, and
it requires a very extraordinary Degree of 

Judgment, and a most exact Knowledge
of human Nature. 
It is admirably remarked by a most
excellent Writer, That Zeal can no more
hurry a Man to act in direct Opposition
to itself, than a rapid Stream can carry a
Boat against its own Current. I will
venture to say, that for a Man to act in
direct Contradiction to the Dictates of Nature,
is, if not impossible, as improbable
and as miraculous as any Thing which can
well be conceived. Should the best Parts
of the Story of M. Antoninus be ascribed
to Nero, or should the worst Incidents of
Nero's Life be imputed to Antoninus, what
would be more shocking to Belief than either
Instance; whereas both these being related
of their proper Agent, constitute the
Truly Marvellous. 
Our modern Authors of Comedy have
fallen almost universally into the Error
here hinted at: Their Heroes generally are
notorious Rogues, and their Heroines
abandoned Jades, during the first four
Acts; but in the fifth, the former become
very worthy Gentlemen, and the latter,
Women of Virtue and Discretion: Nor is 

the Writer often so kind as to give himself
the least Trouble, to reconcile or account
for this monstrous Change and Incongruity. 
There is, indeed, no other Reason to be
assigned for it, than because the Play is
drawing to a Conclusion; as if it was no
less natural in a Rogue to repent in the last
Act of a Play, than in the last of his Life; 
which we perceive to be generally the Case
at Tyburn, a Place which might, indeed,
close the Scene of some Comedies with
much Propriety, as the Heroes in these
are most commonly eminent for those very
Talents which not only bring Men to the
Gallows, but enable them to make an heroic
Figure when they are there. 
Within these few Restrictions, I think,
every Writer may be permitted to deal as
much in the Wonderful as he pleases; nay,
the more he can surprise the Reader, if he
thus keeps within the Rules of Credibility,
the more he will engage his Attention, and
the more he will charm him. As a Genius
of the highest Rank observes in his 5th
Chapter of the Bathos, ‘The great Art of
all Poetry is to mix Truth with Fiction; 
in order to join the Credible with the Surprizing.’ 

For though every good Author will confine
himself within the Bounds of Probability,
it is by no means necessary that his
Characters, or his Incidents, should be trite,
common, or vulgar; such as happen in every
Street, or in every House, or which may
be met with in the home Articles of a
News-paper. Nor must he be inhibited
from shewing many Persons and Things,
which may possibly have never fallen within
the Knowledge of great Part of his Readers. 
If the Writer strictly observes the
Rules abovementioned, he hath discharged
his Part; and is then intitled to some Faith
from his Reader, who is indeed guilty of
critical Infidelity if he disbelieves him. For
want of a Portion of such Faith, I remember
the Character of a young Lady of Quality,
which was condemned on the Stage for
being unnatural, by the unanimous Voice
of a very large Assembly of Clerks and Apprentices; 
tho' it had had the previous
Suffrages of many Ladies of the first Rank; 
one of whom very eminent for her Understanding,
declared it was the Picture of half
the young People of her Acquaintance. 




In which the Landlady pays a Visit to
Mr. Jones. 
When Jones had taken Leave of
his Friend Lieutenant, he endeavoured
to close his Eyes, but all in vain; 
his Spirits were too lively and wakeful to
be lulled to Sleep. So having amused, or
rather tormented himself with the Thoughts
of his Sophia, till it was open Day-light, he
called for some Tea; upon which Occasion
my Landlady herself vouchsafed to pay him
a Visit. 
This was indeed the first Time she had
seen him, or at least had taken any Notice
of him; but as the Lieutenant had assured
her that he was certainly some young Gentleman
of Fashion, she now determined to
shew him all the Respect in her Power: for,
to speak truly, this was one of those Houses
where Gentlemen, to use the Language of
Advertisements, meet with civil Treatment
for their Money. 
She had no sooner begun to make his
Tea, than she likewise began to discourse. 

‘La! Sir,’ said she, ‘I think it is great
Pity that such a pretty young Gentleman
should undervalue himself so, as to go
about with these Soldier Fellows. They
call themselves Gentlemen, I warrant you; 
but, as my first Husband used to say, they
should remember it is we that pay them. 
And to be sure it is very hard upon us to
be obliged to pay them, and to keep 'em
too, as we Publicans are. I had twenty
of 'um last Night, besides Officers; nay,
for matter o' that, I had rather have the
Soldiers than the Officers: For nothing
is ever good enough for those Sparks; 
and I am sure if you was to see the Bills; 
La, Sir, it is nothing. I have had less
Trouble, I warrant you, with a good
Squire's Family, where we take forty or
fifty Shillings of a Night, besides Horses. 
And yet I warrants me, there is narrow a
one of all those Officer Fellows, but looks
upon himself to be as good as narrow a
Squire of 500l. a Year. To be sure it
doth me Good to hear their Men run about
after um, crying your Honour, and your
Honour. Marry come up with such Honour,
and an Ordinary at a Shilling a Head. 
Then there's such Swearing among 'um,
to be sure, it frightens me out o' my Wits,
I thinks nothing can ever prosper with 

such wicked People. And here one of
'um has used you in so barbarous a Manner. 
I thought indeed how well the rest
would secure him; they all hang together; 
for if you had been in Danger of
Death, which I am glad to see you are
not, it would have been all as one to
such wicked People. They would have
let the Murderer go. Laud have Mercy
upon 'um, I would not have such a Sin
to answer for, for the whole World. But
tho' you are likely, with the Blessing
to recover, there is Laa for him yet,
and if you will employ Layer Small,
I darest be sworn he'll make the Fellow
fly the Country for him; tho' perhaps
he'll have fled the Country before; for it
is here To-day and gone To-morrow
with such Chaps. I hope, however, you
will learn more Wit for the future, and
return back to your Friends; I warrant
they are all miserable for your Loss; and
if they was but to know what had happened. 
La my seeming! I would not
for the World they should. Come, come,
we know very well what all the Matter is; 
but if one won't, another will, so pretty
a Gentleman need never want a Lady. I
am sure if I was as you, I would see the
finest She that ever wore a Head hanged, 

before I would go for a Soldier for her.— 
Nay, don't blush so (for indeed he did to
a violent Degree) why, you thought,
Sir, I knew nothing of the Matter; I warrant
you, about Madam Sophia.’ ‘How,’ 
says Jones, starting up, ‘do you know
my Sophia?’ ‘Do I? ay marry,’ cries
the Landlady, ‘many's the Time hath she
lain in this House.’ ‘With her Aunt,
I suppose,’ says Jones.’ —‘Why there it
is now,’ cries the Landlady. ‘Ay, ay,
ay, I know the old Lady very well. And
a sweet young Creature is Madam Sophia,
that's the Truth on't.’ ‘A sweet Creature!’ 
cries Jones, ‘Oh Heavens!’ 

Angels are painted fair to look like her.
There's in her all that we believe of Heaven,
Amazing Brightness, Purity and Truth,
Eternal Joy, and everlasting Love.
‘And could I ever have imagined that
you had known my Sophia.’ ‘I wish,’ 
says the Landlady, ‘you knew half so
much of her. What would you have
given to have sat by her Bed-side? What
a delicious Neck she hath! Her lovely
Limbs have stretched themselves in that
very Bed you now lie in.’ ‘Here!’ cries
Jones, ‘hath Sophia ever lain here? —‘Ay, 

ay, here; there; in that very Bed,’ says
the Landlady, ‘where I wish you had her
this Moment; and she may wish so too,
for any thing I know to the contrary: 
For she hath mentioned your Name to
me.’ —‘Ha,’ cries he, ‘did she ever
mention her poor Jones? —You flatter me
now, I can never believe so much.’ 
Why then,’ answered she, ‘as I hope to
be sav'd, and may the Devil fetch me,
if I speak a Syllable more than the Truth. 
I have heard her mention Mr. Jones; but
in a civil and modest Way, I confess; yet
I could perceive she thought a great deal
more than she said.’ ‘O my dear Woman,’ 
cries Jones, ‘her Thoughts of me
I shall never be worthy of. O she is all
Gentleness, Kindness, Goodness. Why
was such a Rascal as I born, ever to give
her soft Bosom a Moment's Uneasiness? 
Why am I cursed? I, who would undergo
all the Plagues and Miseries which
any Dæmon ever invented for Mankind,
to procure her any Good; nay, Torture
itself could not be Misery to me, did I
but know that she was happy.’ ‘Why
look you there now,’ says the Landlady,
‘I told her you was a constant Lovier.’ 
‘But pray, Madam, tell me when or
where you knew any thing of me; for I 

never was here before, nor do I remember
ever to have seen you.’ ‘Nor is it possible
you should,’ answered she, ‘for you
was a little Thing when I had you in my
Lap at the Squire's.’ —‘How the Squire's,
says Jones,’ ‘what do you know the great
and good Mr. Allworthy then?’ ‘Yes,
marry do I,’ says she; ‘Who in this
Country doth not?’ —‘The Fame of his
Goodness indeed,’ answered Jones, ‘must
have extended farther than this; but
Heaven only can know him, can know
that Benevolence which it copied from itself,
and sent upon Earth as its own Pattern. 
Mankind are as ignorant of such
divine Goodness, as they are unworthy of
it; but none so unworthy of it as myself. 
I who was raised by him to such a
Height; taken in, as you must well
know, a poor base-born Child, adopted
by him, and treated as his own Son to
dare by my Follies to disoblige him, to
draw his Vengeance upon me. Yes, I
deserve it all: For I will never be so ungrateful
as even to think he hath done an
Act of Injustice by me. No, I deserve
to be turned out of Doors, as I am. And
now, Madam, says he, I believe you will
not blame me for turning Soldier, especially
with such a Fortune as this in my 

Pocket.’ At which Words he shook a
Purse which had but very little in it, and
which still appeared to the Landlady to
have less. 
My good Landlady was, (according to
vulgar Phrase) struck all of a Heap by this
Relation. She answered coldly, ‘That to
be sure People were the best Judges what
was most proper for their Circumstances. 
—But hark, says she, I think I hear some
body call. Coming! coming! the Devil's
in all our Volk, nobody hath any Ears. 
I must go down Stairs, if you want any
more Breakfast, the Maid will come up. 
Coming!’ At which Words, without
taking any Leave, she flung out of the
Room: For the lower Sort of People are
very tenacious of Respect; and tho' they
are contented to give this gratis to Persons
of Quality, yet they never confer it on
those of their own Order, without taking
Care to be well paid for their Pains. 




In which the Surgeon makes his second Appearance. 
Before we proceed any farther,
that the Reader may not be mistaken
in imagining the Landlady knew more than
she did, nor surprized that she knew so
much, it may be necessary to inform him,
that the Lieutenant had acquainted her
that the Name of Sophia had been the
Occasion of the Quarrel; and as for the
rest of her Knowledge, the sagacious Reader
will observe how she came by it in the
preceding Scene. Great Curiosity was indeed
mixed with her Virtues; and she never
willingly suffered any one to depart
from her House without enquiring as much
as possible into their Names, Families and
Fortunes. 
She was no sooner gone, than Jones, instead
of animadverting on her Behaviour,
reflected that he was in the same Bed, which
he was informed had held his dear Sophia. 
This occasioned a thousand fond and tender
Thoughts, which we would dwell longer 

upon, did we not consider that such kind
of Lovers will make a very inconsiderable
Part of our Readers. 
In this Situation the Surgeon found him,
when he came to dress his Wound. The
Doctor, perceiving, upon Examination, that
his Pulse was disordered, and hearing that
he had not slept, declared that he was in
great Danger: For he apprehended a Fever
was coming on; which he would have prevented
by Bleeding, but Jones would not
submit, declaring he would lose no more
Blood; and ‘Doctor,’ says he, ‘if you will
be so kind only to dress my Head, I have
no Doubt of being well in a Day or two.’ 
‘I wish,’ answered the Surgeon, ‘I
could assure your being well in a Month
or two. Well, indeed! No, no, People
are not so soon well of such Contusions; 
but, Sir, I am not at this Time of Day
to be instructed in my Operations by a
Patient, and I insist on making a Revulsion
before I dress you.’ 
Jones persisted obstinately in his Refusal,
and the Doctor at last yielded; telling him
at the same Time, that he would not be
answerable for the ill Consequence, and 

hoped he would do him the Justice to acknowledge
that he had given him a contrary
Advice; which the Patient promised
he would. 
The Doctor retired into the Kitchen,
where, addressing himself to the Landlady,
he complained bitterly of the undutiful Behaviour
of his Patient, who would not be
blooded, though he was in a Fever. 
‘It is an eating Fever then,’ says the
Landlady: ‘For he hath devoured two
swinging buttered Toasts this Morning
for Breakfast.’ 
‘Very likely,’ says the Doctor, ‘I have
known People eat in a Fever; and it is
very easily accounted for; because the
Acidity occasioned by the febrile Matter,
may stimulate the Nerves of the Diaphragm,
and thereby occasion a Craving,
which will not be easily distinguishable
from a natural Appetite; but the Aliment
will not be concreted, nor assimilated into
Chyle, and so will corrode the vascular
Orifices, and thus will aggravate the
febrific Symptoms. Indeed I think the
Gentleman in a very dangerous Way, 

and, if he is not blooded, I am afraid
will die.’ 
‘Every Man must die some Time or
other,’ answered the good Woman; ‘it
is no Business of mine. I hope, Doctor,
you would not have me hold him while
you bleed him. —But, harkee, a Word in
your Ear, I would advise you before you
proceed too far, to take care who is to be
your Paymaster.’ 
‘Paymaster!’ said the Doctor, staring,
‘why, I've a Gentleman under my Hands,
have I not?’ 
‘I imagined so as well as you,’ said the
Landlady; ‘but as my first Husband
used to say, every Thing is not what it
looks to be. He is an arrant Scrub, I
assure you. However, take no Notice
that I mentioned any thing to you of the
Matter; but I think People in Business
oft always to let one another know such
Things.’ 
‘And have I suffered such a Fellow as
this, cries the Doctor, in a Passion, ‘to instruct
me? Shall I hear my Practice insulted
by one who will not pay me! I 

am glad I have made this Discovery in
Time. I will see now whether he will be
blooded or no.’ He then immediately
went up Stairs, and flinging open the Door
of the Chamber with much Violence, awaked
poor Jones from a very sound Nap,
into which he was fallen, and what was
still worse, from a delicious Dream concerning
Sophia. 
‘Will you be blooded or no?’ cries the
Doctor, in a Rage. ‘I have told you my
Resolution already,’ answered Jones, ‘and
I wish with all my Heart you had taken
my answer: For you have awaked me
out of the sweetest Sleep which I ever had
in my Life.’ 
‘Ay, ay,’ cries the Doctor, ‘many a
Man hath dosed away his Life. Sleep is
not always good, no more than Food; but
remember I demand of you, for the last
Time, will you be blooded?’ ‘I answer
you for the last Time, said Jones, I will
not.’ ‘Then I wash my Hands of you,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘and I desire you to pay
me for the Trouble I have had already. 
Two Journeys at 5s. each, two Dressings
at 5s. more, and half a Crown for
Phlebotomy.’ ‘I hope,’ said Jones, ‘you 

don't intend to leave me in this Condition.’ 
‘Indeed but I shall,’ said the other.’ 
‘Then said Jones, you have used
me rascally, and I will not pay you a
Farthing.’ ‘Very well,’ cries the Doctor,
‘the first Loss is the best. What
a Pox did my Landlady mean by
sending for me to such Vagabonds?’ At
which Words he flung out of the Room,
and his Patient turning himself about, soon
recovered his Sleep; but his Dream was
unfortunately gone. 



In which is introduced one of the pleasantest
Barbers that was ever recorded in History,
the Barber of Bagdad, nor he in Don
Quixotte not excepted. 
The Clock had now struck Five,
when Jones awaked from a Nap of
seven Hours, so much refreshed, and in
such perfect Health and Spirits, that he resolved
to get up and dress himself: for
which Purpose he unlocked his Portmanteau,
and took out clean Linnen, and a Suit of
Cloaths; but first he slipt on a Frock, and
went down into the Kitchen to bespeak 

something that might pacify certain Tumults
he found rising within his Stomach. 
Meeting the Landlady, he accosted her
with great Civility, and asked ‘what he
could have for Dinner.’ ‘For Dinner!
says she, ‘it is an odd Time a Day to think
about Dinner. There is nothing drest in
the House, and the Fire is almost out: 
Well but,’ says he, ‘I must have something
to eat, and it is almost indifferent
to me what: For to tell you the Truth,
I never was more hungry in my Life.’ 
‘Then,’ says she, ‘I believe there is a
Piece of cold Buttock and Carrot, which
will fit you.’ —‘Nothing better,’ answered
Jones, ‘but I should be obliged to
you, if you would let it be fried.’ To
which the Landlady consented, and said
smiling, ‘she was glad to see him so well
recovered:’ For the Sweetness of our
Heroe's Temper was almost irresistable; 
besides, she was really no ill-humoured Woman
at the Bottom; but she loved Money
so much, that she hated every Thing
which had the Semblance of Poverty. 
Jones now returned in order to dress himself,
while his Dinner was preparing, and 

was, according to his Orders, attended by the
Barber. 
This Barber, who went by the Name of
little Benjamin, was a Fellow of great Oddity
and Humour, which had frequently
led him into small Inconveniencies, such as
Slaps in the Face, Kicks in the Breech,
broken Bones, &c. For every one doth not
understand a Jest; and those who do, are
often displeased with being themselves the
Subjects of it. This Vice was, however, incurable
in him; and though he had often
smarted for it, yet if ever he conceived a
Joke, he was certain to be delivered of it,
without the least Respect of Persons, Time,
or Place. 
He had a great many other Particularities
in his Character, which I shall not
mention, as the Reader will himself very
easily perceive them, on his farther Acquaintance
with this extraordinary Person. 
Jones being impatient to be drest, for a
Reason which may be easily imagined,
thought the Shaver was very tedious in preparing
his Suds, and begged him to make
Haste; to which the other answered, with
much Gravity: For he never discomposed 

his Muscles on any Account. ‘Festina lentè
is a Proverb which I learnt long before I
ever touched a Razor.’ ‘I find, Friend,
you are a Scholar,’ replied Jones, ‘A
poor one,’ said the Barber, ‘non omnia
possumus omnes. Again!’ said Jones; ‘I
fancy you are good at capping Verses.’ 
‘Excuse me, Sir,’ said the Barber, ‘non
tanti me dignor honore.’ And then proceeding
to his Operation, ‘Sir,’ said he,
‘since I have dealt in Suds, I could never
discover more than two Reasons for shaving,
the one is to get a Beard, and the
other to get rid of one. I conjecture,
Sir, it may not be long since you shaved,
from the former of these Motives. Upon
my Word you have had good Success, for
one may say of your Beard, that it is
Tondenti gravior.’ ‘I conjecture, says
Jones, that thou art a very comical Fellow.’ 
‘You mistake me widely, Sir,’ 
said the Barber, ‘I am too much addicted
to the Study of Philosophy, Hinc illæ 
Lacrymæ, Sir, that's my Misfortune. Too
much Learning hath been my Ruin.’ ‘Indeed,’ 
says Jones, ‘I confess, Friend, you
have more Learning than generally belongs
to your Trade; but I can't see
how it can have injured you.’ ‘Alas,
Sir,’ answered the Shaver, ‘my Father 

disinherited me for it. He was a Dancing-Master; 
and because I could read, before
I could dance, he took an Aversion to
me, and left every Farthing among his
other Children. —Will you please to
have your Temples—O la! I ask your
Pardon, I fancy there is Hiatus in manuscriptis. 
I heard you was going to the
Wars: but I find it was a Mistake.’ 
‘Why do you conclude so?’ says Jones. 
‘Sure, Sir,’ answered the Barber, ‘you are
too wise a Man to carry a broken Head
thither; for that would be carrying Coals
to Newcastle.’ 
‘Upon my Word,’ cries Jones, ‘thou
art a very odd Fellow, and I like thy
Humour extremely; I shall be very glad
if thou wilt come to me after Dinner, and
drink a Glass with me; I long to be better
acquainted with thee.’ 
‘O dear Sir,’ said the Barber, ‘I can
do you twenty times as great a Favour,
if you will accept of it.’ ‘What is that,
my Friend,’ cries Jones. ‘Why, I will
drink a Bottle with you, if you please; for
I dearly love Good-nature, and as you
have found me out to be a comical Fellow,
so I have no Skill in Physiognomy, 

if you are not one of the best-natured
Gentlemen in the Universe.’ Jones now
walked down Stairs neatly drest, and perhaps
the famed Adonis was not a lovelier
Figure; and yet he had no Charms for my
Landlady: For as that good Woman did
not resemble Venus at all in her Person, so
neither did she in her Taste. Happy had
it been for Nanny the Chambermaid, if she
had seen with the Eyes of her Mistress; for
that poor Girl fell so violently in love with
Jones in five Minutes, that her Passion afterwards
cost her many a Sigh. This Nancy
was extremely pretty, and altogether as
coy; for she had refused a Drawer, and one
or two young Farmers in the Neighbourhood,
but the bright Eyes of our Heroe
thawed all her Ice in a Moment. 
When Jones returned to the Kitchen, his
Cloth was not yet laid; nor indeed was
there any Occasion it should, his Dinner
remaining in Statu quo, as did the Fire
which was to dress it. This Disappointment
might have put many a philosophical
Temper into a Passion; but it had no such
Effect on Jones. He only gave the Landlady
a gentle Rebuke, saying, ‘Since it
was so difficult to get it heated, he would
eat the Beef cold.’ But now the good Woman, 

whether moved by Compassion, or
by Shame, or by whatever other Motive,
I cannot tell, first gave her Servants a round
Scold for disobeying the Orders which she
had never given, and then bidding the
Drawer lay a Napkin in the Sun, she set
about the Matter in good earnest, and soon
accomplished it. 
This Sun, into which Jones was now
conducted, was truly named as Lucus a non
lucendo; for it was an Apartment into which
the Sun had scarce ever looked. It was
indeed the worst Room in the House; 
and happy was it for Jones that it was so. 
However, he was now too hungry to find
any Fault; but having once satisfied his
Appetite, he ordered the Drawer to carry
a Bottle of Wine into a better Room, and
expressed some Resentment at having been
shewn into a Dungeon. 
The Drawer having obeyed his Commands,
he was, after some Time, attended
by the Barber; who would not indeed have
suffered him to wait so long for his Company,
had he not been listening in the
Kitchen to the Landlady, who was entertaining
a Circle that she had gathered round
her with the History of poor Jones, Part of 

which she had extracted from his own Lips,
and the other Part was her own ingenious
Composition; ‘for she said he was a poor
Parish Boy, taken into the House of
Squire Allworthy, where he was bred up
as an Apprentice, and now turned out of
Doors for his Misdeeds, particularly for
making Love to his young Mistress, and
probably for robbing the House; for how
else should he come by the little Money
he hath. And this,’ says she, ‘is your
Gentleman, forsooth.’ ‘A Servant of
Squire Allworthy!’ says the Barber,
‘what's his Name.’ —‘Why he told me
his Name was Jones,’ says she, ‘perhaps
he goes by a wrong Name. Nay,
and he told me too, that the Squire had
maintained him as his own Son, thof he
had quarrelled with him now.’ ‘And if
his Name be Jones, he told you the
Truth,’ said the Barber; ‘for I have
Relations who live in that Country, nay,
and some People say he is his Son. 
Why doth he not go by the Name of his
Father?’ ‘I can't tell that,’ said the
Barber, ‘many People's Sons don't go by
the Name of their Father.’ ‘Nay,’ said
the Landlady, ‘if I thought he was a Gentleman's
Son, thof he was a Bye Blow, I
should behave to him in another guess 

Manner; for many of these Bye Blows
come to be great Men; and, as my poor
first Husband used to say, Never affront
any Customer that's a Gentleman.’ 



A Dialogue between Mr. Jones and the
Barber. 
This Conversation passed partly
while Jones was at Dinner in his
Dungeon, and partly while he was expecting
the Barber in the Parlour. And, as
soon as it was ended, Mr. Benjamin, as we
have said, attended him, and was very
kindly desired to sit down. Jones then filling
out a Glass of Wine, drank his Health
by the Appellation of Doctissime Tonsorum. 
Ago tibi Gratias, Domine, said the Barber,
and then looking very stedfastly at Jones,
he said, with great Gravity, and with a
seeming Surprize, as if he recollected a
Face he had seen before, ‘Sir, may I crave
the Favour to know if your Name is not
Jones?’ To which the other answered,
That it was. ‘Prob Deum atq; Hominum
Fidem,’ says the Barber, ‘how strangely
Things come to pass. Mr. Jones, I am 

your most obedient Servant. I find you
do not know me, which indeed is no
Wonder, since you never saw me but
once, and then you was very young. 
Pray, Sir, how doth the good Squire
Allworthy? How doth Ille optimus omnium
Patronus?’ ‘I find,’ said Jones, ‘you
do indeed know me; but I have not the
like Happiness of recollecting you.’— 
‘I do not wonder at that,’ cries Benjamin; 
‘but I am surprized I did not know you
sooner, for you are not in the least altered. 
And pray, Sir, may I without
Offence enquire whither you are travelling
this Way? Fill the Glass, Mr. Barber,’ 
said Jones, ‘and ask no more Questions.’ 
‘Nay, Sir,’ answered Benjamin, ‘I would
not be troublesome; and I hope you
don't think me a Man of an impertinent
Curiosity, for that is a Vice which nobody
can lay to my Charge; but I ask
Pardon, for when a Gentleman of your
Figure travels without his Servants, we
may suppose him to be, as we say, in
Casu incognito, and perhaps I ought not
to have mentioned your Name.’ ‘I
own,’ says Jones, ‘I did not expect to
have been so well known in this Country
as I find I am, yet, for particular Reasons,
I shall be obliged to you if you will 

not mention my Name to any other Person,
till I am gone from hence.’ ‘Pauca
Verba,’ answered the Barber; ‘and I
wish no other here knew you but myself; 
for some People have Tongues; but I
promise you I can keep a Secret. My
Enemies will allow me that Virtue.’ ‘And
yet that is not the Characteristic of your
Profession, Mr. Barber,’ answered Jones. 
‘Alas, Sir,’ replied Benjamin, ‘Non si
male nunc & olim sic erat. I was not born
nor bred a Barber, I assure you. I have
spent most of my Time among Gentlemen,
and tho' I say it, I understand
something of Gentility. And if you had
thought me as worthy of your Confidence
as you have some other People, I should
have shewn you I could have kept a Secret
better. I should not have degraded
your Name in a public Kitchen; for indeed,
Sir, some People have not used
you well; for besides making a public
Proclamation of what you told them of a
Quarrel between yourself and Squire Allworthy,
they added Lies of their own,
Things which I knew to be Lies. You
surprize me greatly,’ cries Jones.’ ‘Upon
my Word, Sir,’ answered Benjamin, ‘I
tell the Truth, and I need not tell you my
Landlady was the Person. I am sure it 

moved me to hear the Story, and I hope
it is all false; for I have a great Respect
for you, I do assure you I have, and have
had, ever since the Good-nature you
shewed to Black George, which was talked
of all over the Country, and I received
more than one Letter about it. Indeed
it made you beloved by every body. 
You will pardon me, therefore; for it
was real concern at what I heard made
me ask any Questions; for I have no impertinent
Curiosity about me; but I love
Good-nature, and thence became Amoris
abundantia ergo Te.’ 
Every Profession of Friendship easily gains
Credit with the Miserable, it is no wonder,
therefore, if Jones, who, besides his being miserable,
was extremely open-hearted, very readily
believed all the Professions of Benjamin,
and received him into his Bosom. The Scraps
of Latin, some of which Benjamin applied
properly enough, tho' it did not savour of
profound Literature, seemed yet to indicate
something superior to a common Barber,
and so indeed did his whole Behaviour. 
Jones therefore believed the Truth of what
he said, as to his Original and Education,
and at length, after much Entreaty, he said,
‘Since you have heard, my Friend, so 

much of my Affairs, and seem so desirous
to know the Truth, if you will have Patience
to hear it, I will inform you of the
whole.’ ‘Patience,’ cries Benjamin, ‘that
I will, if the Chapter was never so long,
and I am very much obliged to you for
the Honour you do me.’ 
Jones now began, and related the whole
History, forgetting only a Circumstance or
two, namely, every thing which passed on
that Day in which he had fought with
Thwackum, and ended with his Resolution
to go to Sea, till the Rebellion in the North
had made him change his Purpose, and had
brought him to the Place where he then
was. 
Little Benjamin, who had been all Attention,
never once interrupted the Narrative; 
but when it was ended, he could not
help observing, that there must be surely
something more invented by his Enemies,
and told Mr. Allworthy against him, or so
good a Man would never have dismissed
one he had loved so tenderly, in such a
Manner. To which Jones answered, ‘He
doubted not but such villanous Arts had
been made use of to destroy him.’ 

And surely it was scarce possible for any
one to have avoided making the same Remark
with the Barber; who had not, indeed,
heard from Jones one single Circumstance
upon which he was condemned; for
his Actions were not now placed in those
injurious Lights, in which they had been
misrepresented to Allworthy: Nor could he
mention those many false Accusations which
had been from time to time preferred against
him to Allworthy; for with none of these
he was himself acquainted. He had likewise,
as we have observed, omitted many
material Facts in his present Relation. Upon
the whole, indeed, every thing now appeared
in such favourable Colours to Jones,
that Malice itself would have found it no
easy Matter to fix any Blame upon him. 
Not that Jones desired to conceal or to
disguise the Truth; nay, he would have
been more unwilling to have suffered any
Censure to fall on Mr. Allworthy for punishing
him, than on his own Actions for deserving
it; out, in Reality, so it happened,
and so it always will happen: For let a Man
be never so honest, the Account of his own
Conduct will, in Spite of himself, be so
very favourable, that his Vices will come
purified through his Lips, and, like foul 

Liquors well strained, will leave all their
Foulness behind. For tho' the Facts themselves
may appear, yet so different will be the
Motives, Circumstances, and Consequences,
when a Man tells his own Story, and when
his Enemy tells it, that we scarce can recognize
the Facts to be one and the same. 
Tho' the Barber had drank down this
Story with greedy Ears, he was not yet satisfied. 
There was a Circumstance behind,
which his Curiosity, cold as it was, most
eagerly longed for. Jones had mentioned
the Fact of his Amour, and of his being
the Rival of Blifil, but had cautiously concealed
the Name of the young Lady. The
Barber therefore, after some Hesitation, and
many Hums and Ha's, at last begged Leave
to crave the Name of the Lady, who appeared
to be the principal Cause of all this
Mischief. Jones paused a Moment, and
then said, ‘Since I have trusted you with
so much, and since, I am afraid, her
Name is become too public already on
this Occasion, I will not conceal it from
you. Her Name is Sophia Western.’ 
‘Prob Deum atque Hominum Fidem! 
Squire Western hath a Daughter grown a
Woman!’ ‘Ay, and such a Woman,’ 

cries Jones, ‘that the World cannot match. 
No Eye ever saw any thing so beautiful; 
but that is her least Excellence. Such
Sense, such Goodness! O I could praise
her for ever, and yet should omit half her
Virtues.’ ‘Mr. Western a Daughter grown
up!’ cries the Barber, ‘I remember the
Father a Boy; well, Tempus edax Rerum.’ 
The Wine being now at an End, the
Barber pressed very eagerly to be his Bottle; 
but Jones absolutely refused, saying, ‘He
had already drank more than he ought; 
and that he now chose to retire to his
Room, where he wished he could procure
himself a Book.’ ‘A Book!’ cries Benjamin,
‘what Book would you have? Latin
or English? I have some curious Books in
both Languages. Such as Erasmi Colloquia,
Ovid de Tristibus, Gradus ad Parnassum; 
and in English I have several of
the best Books, tho' some of them are a
little torn; but I have a great Part of
Stowe's Chronicle; the sixth Volume of
Pope's Homer; the third Volume of the
Spectator; the second Volume of Echard's
Roman History; the Craftsman; Robinson
Crusoe; Thomas a Kempis, and two
Volumes of Tom Brown's Works.’ 

‘Those last,’ cries Jones, ‘are Books I
never saw, so if you please to lend me
one of those Volumes.’ The Barber assured
him he would be highly entertained; 
for he looked uupon the Author to have been
one of the greatest Wits that ever the Nation
produced. He then stepped to his
House, which was hard by, and immediately
returned, after which, the Barber having received
very strict Injunctions of Secrecy
from Jones, and having sworn inviolably to
maintain it, they separated; the Barber
went home, and Jones retired to his Chamber. 



In which more of the Talents of Mr. Benjamin
will appear, as well as who this extraordinary
Person was. 
In the Morning Jones grew a little uneasy
at the Desertion of his Surgeon, as he
apprehended some Inconvenience, or even
Danger, might attend the not Dressing his
Wound; he enquired therefore of the
Drawer what other Surgeons were to be met
with in that Neighbourhood. The Drawer
told him there was one not far off; but he 

had known him often refuse to be concerned
after another had been sent for before him; 
‘but, Sir,’ says he, ‘if you will take my
Advice, there is not a Man in the Kingdom
can do your Business better than the
Barber who was with you last Night. We
look upon him to be one of the ablest
Men at a Cut in all this Neighbourhood. 
For tho' he hath not been here above
three Months, he hath done several great
Cures.’ 
The Drawer was presently dispatched for
little Benjamin, who being acquainted in
what Capacity he was wanted, prepared
himself accordingly, and attended; but
with so different an Air and Aspect from
that which he wore when his Bason was
under his Arm, that he could scarce be
known to be the same Person. 
‘So, Tonsor,’ says Jones, ‘I find you
have more Trades than one; how came
you not to inform me of this last Night? 
A Surgeon,’ answered Benjamin, with
great Gravity, ‘is a Profession, not a
Trade. The Reason why I did not acquaint
you last Night that I professed this
Art, was that I then concluded you was
under the Hands of another Gentleman, 

and I never love to interfere with my Brethren
in their Business. Ars omnibus communis; 
but now, Sir, if you please, I
will inspect your Head, and when I see
into your Skull, I will give my Opinion
of your Case.’ 
Jones had not great Faith in this new Professor; 
however he suffered him to open
the Bandage, and to look at his Wound,
which as soon as he had done, Benjamin began
to groan and shake his Head violently. 
Upon which Jones, in a peevish Manner,
bid him not play the Fool, but tell him in
what Condition he found him. ‘Shall I
answer you as a Surgeon, or a Friend?’ 
said Benjamin. ‘As a Friend, and seriously,’ 
said Jones. ‘Why then, upon my Soul,’ 
cries Benjamin, ‘it would require a great
deal of Art to keep you from being well
after a very few Dressings; and if you
will suffer me to apply some Salve of
mine, I will answer for the Success.’ 
Jones gave his Consent, and the Plaister
was applied accordingly. 
‘There, Sir,’ cries Benjamin, ‘now I
will, if you please, resume my former
Self; but a Man is obliged to keep up
some Dignity in his Countenance whilst 

he is performing these Operations, or the
World will not submit to be handled by
him. You can't imagine, Sir, of how much
Consequence a grave Aspect is to a grave
Character. A Barber may make you
laugh, but a Surgeon ought rather to
make you cry.’ 
‘Mr. Barber, or Mr. Surgeon, or Mr.
Barber-Surgeon,’ said Jones.’ —‘O dear
Sir,’ answered Benjamin, interrupting
him, ‘Infandum Regina jubes renovare Dolorem. 
You recal to my Mind that cruel
Separation of the united Fraternities, so
much to the Prejudice of both Bodies, as
all Separations must be, according to the
old Adage, Vis unita fortior; which to
be sure there are not wanting some of one
or of the other Fraternity who are able to
construe. What a Blow was this to me
who unite both in my own Person.’ — 
‘Well, by whatever Name you please to
be called,’ continued Jones, ‘you certainly
are one of the oddest, most comical
Fellows I ever met with, and must have
something very surprizing in your Story,
which you must confess I have a Right to
hear.’ ‘I do confess it,’ answered Benjamin,
‘and will very readily acquaint you
with it, when you have sufficient Leisure; 

for I promise you it will require a good
deal of Time.’ Jones told him, He
could never be more at Leisure than at present. 
‘Well then,’ said Bejamin, ‘I
will obey you; but first I will fasten the
Door, that none may interrupt us.’ He
did so, and then advancing with a solemn
Air to Jones, said; ‘I must begin by telling
you, Sir, that you yourself have been
the greatest Enemy I ever had.’ Jones
was a little startled at this sudden Declaration. 
‘I your Enemy, Sir!’ says he, with
much Amazement, and some Sternness in
his Look. ‘Nay, be not angry,’ said
Benjamin, ‘for I promise you I am not. 
You are perfectly innocent of having intended
me any Wrong; for you was then
an Infant; but I shall, I believe, unriddle
all this the Moment I mention my
Name. Did you never hear, Sir, of one
Partridge, who had the Honour of being
reputed your Father, and the Misfortune
of being ruined by that Honour?’ ‘I
have indeed heard of that Partridge,’ says
Jones, ‘and have always believed myself
to be his Son.’ ‘Well, Sir,’ answered
Benjamin, ‘I am that Partridge; but I
here absolve you from all filial Duty; for
I do assure you you are no Son of mine.’ 
‘How,’ replied Jones, ‘and is it possible 

that a false Suspicion should have drawn
all the ill Consequences upon you, with
which I am too well acquainted?’ ‘It is
possible,’ cries Benjamin, ‘for it is so; 
but tho' it is natural enough for Men to
hate even the innocent Causes of their Sufferings,
yet I am of a different Temper. 
I have loved you ever since I heard of
your Behaviour to Black George, as I told
you; and I am convinced, from this extraordinary
Meeting, that you are born
to make me Amends for all I have suffered
on that Account. Besides, I dreamt,
the Night before I saw you, that I stumbled
over a Stool without hurting myself; 
which plainly shewed me something good
was towards me; and last Night I dreamt
again, that I rode behind you on a Milk
white Mare, which is a very excellent
Dream, and betokens much good Fortune,
which I am resolved to pursue, unless
you have the Cruelty to deny me.’ 
‘I should be very glad, Mr. Partridge,’ 
answered Jones, ‘to have it in my Power
to make you Amends for your Sufferings
on my Account; tho' at present I see no
Likelihood of it; however, I assure your
I will deny you nothing which is in my
Power to grant.’ 

‘It is in your Power sure enough,’ replied
Benjamin, ‘for I desire nothing more
than Leave to attend you in this Expedition. 
Nay, I have so entirely set my
Heart upon it, that if you should refuse
me, you will kill both a Barber and a
Surgeon in one Breath.’ 
Jones answered smiling, That he should be
very sorry to be the Occasion of so much
Mischief to the Public. He then advanced
many prudential Reasons, in order to dissuade
Benjamin (whom we shall hereafter call Partridge)
from his Purpose; but all were in vain. 
Partridge relied strongly on his Dream of the
milk-white Mare. ‘Besides, Sir, says he,
I promise you, I have as good an Inclination
to the Cause, as any Man can possibly
have; and go I will, whether you admit
me to go in your Company or not.’ 
Jones, who was as much pleased with
Partridge, as Partridge could be with him,
and who had not consulted his own Inclination,
but the Good of the other in desiring
him to stay behind; when he found his
Friend so resolute, at last gave his Consent; 
but then recollecting himself, he said, ‘Perhaps,’ 
Mr. Partridge, you think I shall 

‘be able to support you, but I really am
not;’ and then taking out his Purse, he
told out nine Guineas, which he declared
were his whole Fortune. 
Partridge answered, ‘that his Dependance
was only on his future Favour 
For he was thoroughly convinced he
would shortly have enough in his Power. 
At present, Sir, said he, I believe I am
rather the richer Man of the two; but all
I have is at your Service, and at your
Disposal. I insist upon your taking the
whole, and I beg only to attend you in
the Quality of your Servant, Nil desperandum
est Tencro duce et auspice Tencro;’ 
But to this generous Proposal concerning
the Money, Jones would by no means submit. 
It was resolved to set out the next Morning; 
when a Difficulty arose concerning the
Baggage, for the Portmanteau of Mr.
Jones was too large to be carried without a
Horse. 
‘If I may presume to give my Advice,’ 
says Partridge, ‘this Portmanteau, with
every Thing in it, except a few Shirts,
should be left behind. Those I shall be 

easily able to carry for you, and the rest
of your Clothes will remain very safely
locked up in my House.’ 
This Method was no sooner proposed than
agreed to, and then the Barber departed, in
order to prepare every Thing for his intended
Expedition. 



Containing better Reasons than any which
have yet appeared for the Conduct of Partridge; 
an Apology for the Weakness of
Jones; and some farther Anecdotes concerning
my Landlandy. 
Though Partridge was one of
the most superstitious of Men, he
would hardly, perhaps, have desired to accompany
Jones on his Expedition merely
from the Omens of the Joint-stool, and
white Mare, if his Prospect had been no
better than to have shared the Plunder gained
in the Field of Battle. ln Fact, when Partridge
came to ruminate on the Relation he
had heard from Jones, he could not reconcile
to himself, that Mr. Allworthy should
turn his Son (for so he most firmly believed 

him to be) out of Doors, for any Reason
which he had heard assigned. He concluded
therefore, that the whole was a Fiction,
and that Jones, of whom he had often from
his Correspondents heard the wildest Character,
had in reality run away from his
Father. It came into his Head, therefore,
that if he could prevail with the young
Gentleman to return back to his Father, he
should by that Means render a Service to
Allworthy, which would obliterate all his
former Anger; nay, indeed he conceived
that very Anger was counterfeited, and that
Allworthy had sacrificed him to his own Reputation. 
And this Suspicion, indeed, he
well accounted for, from the tender Behaviour
of that excellent Man to the Foundling
Child; from his great Severity to Partridge,
who knowing himself to be innocent,
could not conceive that any other should
think him guilty; lastly, from the Allowance
which he had privately received long
after the Annuity had been publickly taken
from him; and which he looked upon as a
kind of Smart-money, or rather by way of
Atonement for Injustice: For it is very uncommon,
I believe, for Men to ascribe the
Benefactions they receive to pure Charity,
when they can possibly impute them to any
other Motive. If he could by any Means, 

therefore, persuade the young Gentleman
to return home, he doubted not but that
he should again be received into the Favour
of Allworthy, and well rewarded for
his Pains; nay, and should be again restored
to his native Country; a Restoration
which Ulysses himself never wished more
heartily than poor Partridge. 
As for Jones, he was well satisfied with
the Truth of what the other had asserted,
and believed that Partridge had no other
Inducements but Love to him, and Zeal
for the Cause. A blameable Want of Caution,
and Diffidence in the Veracity of others,
in which he was highly worthy of
Censure. To say the Truth, there are but
two Ways by which Men become possessed
of this excellent Quality. The one is from
long Experience, and the other is from Nature; 
which last, I presume, is often meant
by Genius, or great natural Parts; and it
is infinitely the better of the two, not only
as we are Matters of it much earlier in
Life, but as it is much more infallible and
conclusive: For a Man who hath been imposed
on by ever so many, may still hope
to find other more honest; whereas he
who receives certain necessary Admonitions
from within, that this is impossible, must 

have very little Understanding indeed, if
he ever renders himself liable to be once deceived. 
As Jones had not this Gift from
Nature, he was too young to have gained
it by Experience; for at the diffident Wisdom
which is to be acquired this Way, we
seldom arrive till very late in Life; which
is perhaps the Reason why some old Men
are apt to despise the Understandings of all
those who are a little younger than themselves. 
Jones spent most Part of the Day in the
Company of a new Acquaintance. This
was no other than the Landlord of the
House, or rather the Husband of the Landlady. 
He had but lately made his Descent
down Stairs, after a long Fit of the Gout,
in which Distemper he was generally confined
to his Room during one half of the
Year; and during the rest, he walked about
the House, smoaked his Pipe, and drank
his Bottle with his Friends, without concerning
himself in the least with any Kind
of Business. He had been bred, as they
call it, a Gentleman that is, bred up to
do nothing, and had spent a very small Fortune,
which he inherited from an industrious
Farmer his Uncle, in Hunting, Horse-racing,
and Cock-fighting, and had been 

married by my Landlady for certain Purposes
which he had long since desisted from
answering: for which she hated him heartily. 
But as he was a surly Kind of Fellow,
so she contented herself with frequently
upbraiding him by disadvantageous Comparisons
with her first Husband, whose
Praise she had eternally in her Mouth; and
as she was for the most part Mistress of the
Profit, so she was satisfied to take upon herself
the Care and Government of the Family,
and after a long successless Struggle,
to suffer her Husband to be Master of himself. 
In the Evening when Jones retired to his
Room, a small Dispute arose between this
fond Couple concerning him. ‘What,’ says
the Wife, ‘you have been tipling with the
Gentleman! I see.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the
Husband, ‘we have cracked a Bottle together,
and a very Gentleman-like Man
he is, and hath a very pretty Notion of
Horse-flesh. Indeed he is young, and
hath not seen much of the World: For
I believe he hath been at very few Horse-races.’ 
‘O ho! he is one of your Order,
is he?’ replies the Landlady, ‘he
must be a Gentleman to be sure, if he is
a Horse-racer. The Devil fetch such 

Gentry, I am sure I wish I had never
seen any of them. I have Reason to love
Horse-racers truly.’ ‘That you have,
says the Husband; for I was one you
know.’ ‘Yes,’ answered she, ‘You
are a pure one indeed. As my first Husband
used to say, I may put all the Good
I have ever got by you in my Eyes, and
see never the worse.’ ‘D&wblank;n your first
Husband,’ cries he,’—‘Don't d&wblank;n a
better Man than yourself,’ answered the
Wife, ‘if he had been alive, you durst not
have done it.’ ‘Then you think,’ says
he, ‘I have not so much Courage as
yourself: For you have d&wblank;n'd him often
in my Hearing.’ ‘If I did,’ says she,
‘I have repented of it many's the good
Time and oft. And if he was so good
to forgive me a Word spoken in Haste,
or so, it doth not become such a one as
you to twitter me. He was a Husband
to me, he was; and if ever I did make
use of an ill Word or so in a Passion; I
never called him Rascal, I should have
have told a Lie, if I had called him Rascal.’ 
Much more she said, but not in his
Hearing: For having lighted his Pipe, he
staggered off as fast as he could. We shall
therefore transcribe no more of her Speech,
as it approached still nearer and nearer to a 

Subject too indelicate to find any Place in
this History. 
Early in the Morning, Partridge appeared
at the Bedside of Jones, ready equipped
for the Journey, with his Knapsack at his
Back. This was his own Workmanship; 
for besides his other Trades, he was no indifferent
Taylor. He had already put up
his whole Stock of Linnen in it, consisting
of four Shirts, to Which he now added eight
for Mr. Jones, and then packing up the
Portmanteau, he was departing with it towards
his own House, but was stopt in his
Way by the Landlady, who refused to suffer
any Removals till after the Payment of
the Reckoning. 
The Landlady was, as we have said, absolute
Governess in these Regions; it was
therefore necessary to comply with her Rules,
so the Bill was presently writ out, which
amounted to a much larger Sum than might
have been expected, from the Entertainment
which Jones had met with; but here
we are obliged to disclose some Maxims,
which Publicans hold to be the grant Mysteries
of their Trade. The first is, if they
have any Thing good in their House (which
indeed very seldom happens) to produce it 

only to Persons who travel with great Equipages. 
2dly, To charge the same for the
very worst Provisions, as if they were the
best. And, lastly, if any of their Guests
call but for little, to make them pay a
double Price for every Thing they have; 
so that the Amount by the Head may be
much the same. 
The Bill being made and discharged,
Jones set forward with Partridge carrying
his Knapsack; nor did the Landlady condescend
to wish him a good Journey: for
this was, it seems, an Inn frequented by
People of Fashion; and I know not whence
it is, but all those who get their Livelihood
by People of Fashion, contract as much Insolence
to the rest of Mankind, as if they
really belonged to that Rank themselves. 




Jones arrives at Gloucester, and goes to the
Bell; the Character of that House, and of
a Petty-fogger, which he there meets
with. 
Mr. Jones, and Partridge, or Little
Benjamin, (which Epithet of Little
was perhaps given him ironically, he being
in reality near six Feet high) having left
their last Quarters in the Manner before
described, travelled on to Glocester without
meeting any Adventure worth relating. 
Being arrived here, they chose for their
House of Entertainment the Sign of the
Bell, an excellent House indeed, and which
I do most seriously recommend to every
Reader who shall visit this ancient City. 
The Master of it is Brother to the great
Preacher Whitefield; but is absolutely untainted
with the pernicious Principles of
Methodism, or of any other heretical Sect. 
He is indeed a very honest plain Man, and
in my Opinion, not likely to create any
Disturbance either in Church or State. His 

Wife hath, I believe, had much Pretension
to Beauty, and still a very fine Woman. 
Her Person and Deportment might have
made a shining Figure in the politest Assemblies; 
but though she must be conscious
of this, and many other Perfections, she
seems perfectly contented with, and resigned
to that State of Life to which she is
called; and this Resignation is entirely
owing to the Prudence and Wisdom of her
Temper: For she is at present as free from
any methodistical Notions as her Husband. 
I say at present: For she freely confesses
that her Brother's Documents made at first
some Impression upon her, and that she had
put herself to the Expence of a long Hood,
in order to attend the extraordinary Emotions
of the Spirit; but having found during
an Experiment of three Weeks, no
Emotions, she says, worth a Farthing, she
very wisely laid by her Hood, and abandoned
the Sect. To be concise, she is a
very friendly, good-natured Woman, and
so industrious to oblige, that the Guests
must be of a very morose Disposition who
are not extremely well satisfied in her
House. 
Mrs. Whitefield happened to be in the
Yard when Jones and his Attendant marched 

in. Her Sagacity soon discovered in the
Air of our Hero something which distinguished
him from the Vulgar. She ordered
her Servants, therefore, immediately to
shew him into a Room, and presently afterwards
invited him to Dinner with herself; 
which Invitation he very thankfully accepted: 
For indeed much less agreeable Company
than that of Mrs. Whitefield, and a
much worse Entertainment than she had
provided, would have been welcome, after
so long fasting, and so long a Walk. 
Besides Mr. Jones and the good Governess
of the Mansion, there sat down at
Table an Attorney of Salisbury, indeed the
very same who had brought the News of
Mrs. Blifil's Death to Mr. Allworthy, and
whose Name, which, I think, we did not
before mention, was Dowling; there was
likewise present another Person, who stiled
himself a Lawyer, and who lived somewhere
near Lidlinch in Somersetshire. This
Fellow, I say, stiled himself a Lawyer, but
was indeed a most vile Petty-fogger, without
Sense or Knowledge of any Kind; one
of those who may be termed Train-bearers
to the Law; a Sort of Supernumeraries in
the Profession, who are the Hackneys of 

Attornies, and will ride more Miles for half
a Crown, than a Post-boy. 
During the time of Dinner, the Somersetshire
Lawyer recollected the Face of
Jones, which he had seen at Mr. Allworthy's: 
For he had often visited in that Gentleman's
Kitchen. He therefore took Occasion
to enquire after the good Family there,
with that Familiarity which would have become
an intimate Friend or Acquaintance
of Mr. Allworthy; and indeed he did all
in his Power to insinuate himself to be such,
though he had never had the Honour of
speaking to any Person in that Family higher
than the Butler. Jones answered all his
Questions with much Civility, though he
never remembered to have seen the Petty-fogger
before, and though he concluded
from the outward Appearance and Behaviour
of the Man, that he usurped a Freedom
with his Betters, to which he was by
no means intitled. 
As the Conversation of Fellows of this
Kind, is of all others the most detestable to
Men of any Sense, the Cloth was no sooner
removed than Mr. Jones withdrew, and a
little barbarously left poor Mrs. Whitefield
to do a Pennance, which I have often heard 

Mr. Timothy Harris, and other Publicans of
good Taste, lament, as the severest Lot annexed
to their Calling, namely, that of being
obliged to keep Company with their
Guests. 
Jones had no sooner quitted the Room,
than the Petty-fogger, in a whispering Tone,
asked Mrs. Whitefield, ‘if she knew who
that fine Spark was?’ She answered, ‘she
had never seen the Gentleman before.’ 
‘The Gentleman, indeed!’ replied the
Petty-fogger, ‘a pretty Gentleman truly! 
Why, he's the Bastard of a Fellow who
was hanged for Horse-stealing. He was
dropt at Squire Allworthy's Door, where
one of the Servants found him in a Box
so full of Rain-water, that he would certainly
have been drowned, had he not
been reserved for another Fate.’ ‘Ay, ay,
you need not mention it, I protest, we
understand what that Fate is very well,’ 
cries Dowling, with a most facetious Grin. 
‘Well,’ continued the other, ‘the Squire
ordered him to be taken in: For he is a
timborsome Man every Body knows,
and was afraid of drawing himself into a
Scrape, and there the Bastard was bred
up, and fed and cloathified all to the
World like any Gentleman; and there 

he got one of the Servant Maids with
Child, and persuaded her to swear it to
the Squire himself; and afterwards he
broke the Arm of one Mr. Thwackum a
Clergyman, only because he reprimanded
him for following Whores; and afterwards
he snapt a Pistol at Mr. Blifil behind his
Back; and once when Squire Allworthy
was sick, he got a Drum, and beat it all
over the House, to prevent him from
sleeping: And twenty other Pranks he
hath played, for all which, about four or
five Days ago, just before I left the Country,
the Squire strip'd him stark naked,
and turned him out of Doors.’ 
‘And very justly too, I protest,’ cries
Dowling, ‘I would turn my own Son out
of Doors, if he was guilty of half as
much. And pray what is the Name of
this pretty Gentleman?’ 
‘The Name o'un!’ answered Petty-fogger,
‘why, he is a called Thomas Jones.’ 
‘Jones!’ answered Dowling, a little eagerly,
‘what, Mr. Jones that lived at Mr.
Allworthy's! was that the Gentleman that
dined with us?’ ‘The very same,’ said
the other. ‘I have heard of the Gentleman,’ 

cries Dowling, ‘often; but I never
heard any ill Character of him.’ ‘And
I am sure,’ says Mrs. Whitefield, ‘if half
what this Gentleman hath said be true,
Mr. Jones hath the most deceitful Countenance
I ever saw; for sure his Looks
promise something very different; and I
must say, for the little I have seen of him,
he is as civil a well-bred Man as you
would wish to converse with.’ 
Pettyfogger calling to mind that he
had not been sworn, as he usually was,
before he gave his Evidence, now bound
what he had declared with so many
Oaths and Imprecations, that the Lady's
Ears were shocked, and she put a
Stop to his swearing, by assuring him of
her Belief. Upon which he said, ‘I hope,
Madam, you imagine I would scorn to
tell such Things of any Man, unless I
knew them to be true. What Interest
have I in taking away the Reputation of
a Man who never injured me? I promise
you every Syllable of what I have said is
Fact, and the whole Country knows it.’ 
As Mrs. Whitefield had no Reason to suspect
that the Pettyfogger had any Motive
or Temptation to abuse Jones, the Reader 

cannot blame her for believing what he so
confidently affirmed with many Oaths. She
accordingly gave up her Skill in Physiognomy,
and henceforwards conceived so ill
an Opinion of her Guest, that she heartily
wished him out of her House. 
This Dislike was now farther encreased
by a Report which Mr. Whitefield made from
the Kitchen, where Partridge had informed
the Company, ‘That tho' he carried the
Knapsack, and contented himself with
staying among Servants, while Tom Jones
(as he called him) was regaling in the
Parlour, he was not his Servant, but
only a Friend and Companion, and as
good a Gentleman as Mr. Jones himself.’ 
Dowling sat all this while silent, biting his
Fingers, making Faces, grinning, and looking
wonderfully arch; at last he opened his
Lips, and protested that the Gentleman
looked like another Sort of Man. He then
called for his Bill with the utmost Haste,
declared he must be at Hereford that Evening,
lamented his great Hurry of Business,
and wished he could divide himself into
twenty Pieces, in order to be at once in
twenty Places. 

The Pettyfogger now likewise departed,
and then Jones desired the Favour of Mrs.
Whitefield's Company to drink Tea with
him; but she refused, and with a Manner so
different from that with which she had received
him at Dinner, that it a little surprized
him. And now he soon perceived
her Behaviour totally changed; for instead
of that natural Affability which we have
before celebrated, she wore a constrained
Severity on her Countenance, which was so
disagreeable to Mr. Jones, that he resolved,
however late, to quit the House that Evening. 
He did indeed account somewhat unfairly
for this sudden Change; for besides some
hard and unjust Surmises concerning female
Fickleness and Mutability, he began to suspect
that he owed this Want of Civility to
his Want of Horses, a Sort of Animals
which, as they dirty no Sheets, are thought,
in Inns, to pay better for their Beds than
their Riders, and are therefore considered
as the more desirable Company; but Mrs.
Whitefield, to do her Justice, had a much
more liberal Way of thinking. She was
perfectly well-bred, and could be very civil
to a Gentleman, tho' he walked on Foot: 

In Reality, she looked on our Heroe as a
sorry Scoundrel, and therefore treated him
as such, for which not even Jones himself,
had he known as much as the Reader,
could have blamed her; nay, on the contrary,
he must have approved her Conduct,
and have esteemed her the more for the Disrespect
shewn towards himself. This is indeed
a most aggravating Circumstance
which attends unjustly depriving Men of
their Reputation; for a Man who is conscious
of having an ill Character, cannot
justly be angry with those who neglect and
slight him; but ought rather to despise such
as affect his Conversation, unless where a
perfect Intimacy must have convinced them
that their Friend's Character hath been falsely
and injuriously aspersed. 
This was not, however, the Case of
Jones; for as he was a perfect Stranger to
the Truth, so he was with good Reason
offended at the Treatment he received. He
therefore paid his Reckoning and departed,
highly against the Will of Mr. Partridge, who
having remonstrated much against it to no
Purpose, at last condescended to take up his
Knapsack, and to attend his Friend. 




Containing several Dialogues between Jones
and Partridge, concerning Love, Cold,
Hunger, and other Matters; with the
lucky and narrow Escape of Partridge, as
he was on the very Brink of making a fatal
Discovery to his Friend. 
The Shadows began now to descend
larger from the high Mountains: 
The feather'd Creation had betaken themselves
to their Rest. Now the highest Order
of Mortals were sitting down to their
Dinners, and the lowest Order to their Suppers. 
In a Word, the Clock struck five
just as Mr. Jones took his Leave of Gloucester; 
an Hour at which (as it was now
Midwinter) the dirty Fingers of Night
would have drawn her sable Curtain over
the Universe, had not the Moon forbid her,
who now with a Face as broad and as red
as those of some jolly Mortals, who, like
her, turn Night into Day, began to rise
from her Bed, where she had slumbred away
the Day, in order to sit up all Night. 
Jones had not travelled far before he paid
his Compliments to that beautiful Planet, 

and turning to his Companion, asked him. 
If he had ever beheld so delicious an Evening. 
Partridge making no ready Answer
to his Question, he proceeded to comment
on the Beauty of the Moon, and repeated
some Passages from Milton, who hath certainly
excelled all other Poets in his Description
of the heavenly Luminaries. He
then told Partridge the Story from the
Spectator, of two Lovers who had agreed
to entertain themselves when they were at a
great Distance from each other, by repairing,
at a certain fixed Hour, to look at the
Moon; thus pleasing themselves with the
Thought that they were both employed in
contemplating the same Object at the same
Time. ‘Those Lovers,’ added he, ‘must
have had Souls truly capable of feeling all
the Tenderness of the sublimest of all human
Passions.’ ‘Very probably,’ cries
Partridge, ‘but I envy them more if they
had Bodies incapable of feeling cold; for
I am almost frozen to Death, and am very
much afraid I shall lose a Piece of my
Nose before we get to another House of
Entertainment. Nay, truly, we may
well expect some Judgment should happen
to us for our Folly in running away
so by Night from one of the most excellent
Inns I ever set my Foot into. I am 

sure I never saw more good Things in
my Life, and the greatest Lord in the
Land cannot live better in his own House
than he may there. And to forsake such
a House, and go a rambling about the
Country, the Lord knows whither, per
devia rura viarum, I say nothing, for my
Part; but some People might not have
Charity enough to conclude we were in
our sober Senses.’ ‘Fie upon it, Mr.
Partridge,’ says Jones, ‘have a better
Heart; consider you are going to face an
Enemy, and are you afraid of facing a
little Cold? I wish, indeed, we had a
Guide to advise which of these Roads we
should take.’ ‘May I be so bold,’ says
Partridge, ‘to offer my Advice: Interdum
Stultus opportuna loquitur.’ ‘Why, which
of them,’ cries Jones, ‘would you recommend?’ 
‘Truly neither of them,’ answered
Partridge. ‘The only Road we
can be certain of finding, is the Road we
came. A good hearty Pace will bring
us back to Gloucester in an Hour; but if
we go forward, the Lord Harry knows
when we shall arrive at any Place; for I
see at least fifty Miles before me, and no
House in all the Way.’ ‘You see, indeed,
a very fair Prospect,’ says Jones,
‘which receives great additional Beauty 

from the extreme Lustre of the Moon. 
However, I will keep the Left-hand
Track, as that seems to lead directly to
those Hills, which we were informed
lie not far from Worcester. And
here, if you are inclined to quit me, you
may, and return back again; but for
my Part, I am resolved to go forward.’ 
‘It is unkind in you, Sir,’ says Partridge,
‘to suspect me of any such Intention. 
What I have advised hath been as
much on your Account as on my own; but
since you are determined to go on, I am
as much determined to follow. I præ, sequar
te.’ 
They now travelled some Miles without
speaking to each other, during which Suspence
of Discourse Jones often sighed, and
Benjamin groaned as bitterly, tho' from a
very different Reason. At length Jones
made a full Stop, and turning about, cries,
‘Who knows, Partridge, but the loveliest
Creature in the Universe may have her
Eyes now fixed on that very Moon which
I behold at this Instant!’ ‘Very likely,
Sir,’ answered Partridge, ‘and if my
Eyes were fixed on a good Surloin of
Roast Beef, the Devil might take the 

Moon and her Horns into the Bargain.’ 
‘Did ever Tramontane make such an Answer,’ 
cries Jones? ‘Prithee, Partridge,
wast thou never susceptible of Love in thy
Life, or hath Time worn away all the
Traces of it from thy Memory?’ ‘Alack-a-day,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘well would it
have been for me if I had never known
what Love was. Infandum Regina jubes
renovare Dolorem. I am sure I have tasted
all the Tenderness and Sublimities and Bitternesses
of the Passion.’ ‘Was your Mistress
unkind then?’ says Jones. ‘Very
unkind indeed, Sir,’ answered Partridge; 
‘for she married me, and made one of the
most confounded Wives in the World. 
However, Heaven be praised, she's gone,
and if I believed she was in the Moon,
according to a Book I once read, which
teaches that to be the Receptacle of departed
Spirits, I would never look at it
for fear of seeing her; but I wish, Sir,
that the Moon was a Looking-glass for
your Sake, and that Miss Sophia Western
was now placed before it.’ ‘My dear Partridge,’ 
cries Jones, ‘what a Thought
was there! A Thought which I am certain
could never have entered into any
Mind but that of a Lover. O Partridge,
could I hope once again to see that Face; 

but, alas! all those golden Dreams are
vanished for ever, and my only Refuge
from future Misery is to forget the Object
of all my former Happiness.’ ‘And do
you really despair of ever seeing Miss
Western again?’ answered Partridge; ‘if
you will follow my Advice, I will engage
you shall not only see her, but have her
in your Arms.’ ‘Ha! do not awaken
a Thought of that Nature,’ cries Jones. ‘I
have struggled sufficiently to conquer all
such Wishes already.’ ‘Nay,’ answered
Partridge, ‘if you do not wish to have
your Mistress in your Arms, you are
a most extraordinary Lover indeed.’ 
‘Well, well,’ says Jones, ‘let us avoid
this Subject; but pray what is your Advice?’ 
‘To give it you in the military
Phrase then,’ says Partridge, ‘as we are
Soldiers; ‘To the Right about.’ ‘Let
us return the Way we came, we may yet
reach Gloucester to Night, tho' late; 
whereas if we proceed, we are likely, for
ought I see, to ramble about for ever without
coming either to House or Home.’ 
‘I have already told you my Resolution is
to go on,’ answered Jones; ‘but I
would have you go back. I am obliged
to you for your Company hither, and I
beg you to accept a Guinea as a small Instance 

of my Gratitude. Nay, it would
be cruel in me to suffer you to go any
farther; for, to deal plainly with you,
my chief End and Desire is a glorious
Death in the Service of my King and
Country.’ ‘As for your Money,’ replied
Partridge, ‘I beg, Sir, you will put it up; 
I will receive none of you at this Time; 
for at present I am, I believe, the richer
Man of the two. And as your Resolution
is to go on, so mine is to follow you if
you do. Nay, now my Presence appears
absolutely necessary to take Care of you,
since your Intentions are so desperate, for
I promise you my Views are much more
prudent: As you are resolved to fall in
Battle, if you can, so I am resolved as
firmly to come to no Hurt if I can help
it. And indeed I have the Comfort to
think there will be but little Danger; for
a popish Priest told me the other Day,
the Business would soon be over, and he
believed without a Battle.’ ‘A popish
Priest,’ cries Jones, ‘I have heard, is
not always to be believed when he speaks
in Behalf of his Religion.’ ‘Yes, but so
far,’ answered the other, ‘from speaking
in Behalf of his Religion, he assured me,
the Catholicks did not expect to be any
Gainers by the Change; for that Prince 

Charles was as good a Protestant as any
in England; and that nothing but Regard
to Right made him and the rest of the
popish Party to be Jacobites.’ ‘I believe
him to be as much a Protestant as I believe
he hath any Right,’ says Jones,
‘and I make no Doubt of our Success, but
not without a Battle. So that I am not
so sanguine as your Friend the popish
Priest.’ ‘Nay, to be sure, Sir,’ answered
Partridge, ‘all the Prophecies I
have ever read, speak of a great deal of
Blood to be spilt in the Quarrel, and the
Miller with three Thumbs, who is now
alive, is to hold the Horses of three
Kings, up to his Knees in Blood. Lord
have Mercy upon us all, and send better
Times!’ ‘With what Stuff and Nonsense
hast thou filled thy Head,’ answered
Jones? ‘This too, I suppose, comes
from the popish Priest. Monsters and
Prodigies are the proper Arguments to
support monstrous and absurd Doctrines. 
The Cause of King George is the Cause of
Liberty and true Religion. In other
Words, it is the Cause of common Sense,
my Boy, and I warrant you will succeed,
tho' Briareus himself was to rise again
with his hundred Thumbs, and to turn
Miller.’ Partridge made no Reply to 

this. He was indeed cast into the utmost
Confusion by this Declaration of Jones. 
For to inform the Reader of a Secret,
which we had no proper Opportunity of
revealing before, Partridge was in Truth a
Jacobite, and had concluded that Jones was
of the same Party, and was now proceeding
to join the Rebels. An Opinion which was
not without Foundation. For the tall longsided
Dame, mentioned by Hudibras; that
many-eyed, many-tongued, many-mouthed,
many-eared Monster of Virgil, had related
the Story of the Quarrel between Jones and
the Officer, with her usual Regard to
Truth. She had indeed changed the Name
of Sophia into that of the Pretender, and
had reported, that drinking his Health was
the Cause for which Jones was knocked
down. This Partridge had heard, and most
firmly believed. 'Tis no Wonder, therefore,
that he had thence entertained the
above-mentioned Opinion of Jones; and
which he had almost discovered to him before
he found out his own Mistake. And
at this the Reader will be the less inclined to
wonder, if he pleases to recollect the doubtful
Phrase in which Jones first communicated his
Resolution to Mr. Partridge; and, indeed,
had the Words been less ambiguous, Partride
might very well have construed them 

as he did; being persuaded, as he was,
that the whole Nation were of the same
Inclination in their Hearts: Nor did it
stagger him that Jones had travelled in the
Company of Soldiers; for he had the same
Opinion of the Army which he had of the
rest of the People. 
But however well affected he might be
to James or Charles, he was still much more
attached to Little Benjamin than to either; 
for which Reason he no sooner discovered
the Principles of his Fellow-traveller, than
he thought proper to conceal, and outwardly
to give up his own to the Man on whom
he depended for the making his Fortune,
since he by no means believed the Affairs
of Jones to be so desperate as they really
were with Mr. Allworthy; for as he had
kept a constant Correspondence with some
of his Neighbours since he left that Country,
he had heard much, indeed more than was
true, of the great Affection Mr. Allworthy
bore this young Man, who, as Partridge
had been instructed, was to be that Gentleman's
Heir, and whom, as we have said, he
did not in the least doubt to be his Son. 
He imagined, therefore, that whatever
Quarrel was between them, it would be 

certainly made up at the Return of Mr.
Jones; an Event from which he promised
great Advantages, if he could take this
Opportunity of ingratiating himself with
that young Gentleman; and if he could
by any Means be instrumental in procuring
his Return, he doubted not, as we have before
said, but it would as highly advance
him in the Favour of Mr. Allworthy. 
We have already observed, that he was
a very good-natured Fellow, and he hath
himself declared the violent Attachment he
had to the Person and Character of Jones; 
but possibly the Views which I have just before
mentioned, might likewise have some little
Share in prompting him to undertake this
Expedition, at least in urging him to continue
it, after he had discovered, that his
Master and himself, like some prudent Fathers
and Sons, tho' they travelled together
in great Friendship, had embraced opposite
Parties. I am led into this Conjecture,
by having remarked, that tho' Love,
Friendship, Esteem, and such like, have
very powerful Operations in the human
Mind; Interest, however, is an Ingredient
seldom omitted by wise Men, when they
would work others to their own Purposes. 
This is indeed a most excellent Medicine, 

and like Ward's Pill, flies at once to the
particular Part of the Body on which you desire
to operate, whether it be the Tongue,
the Hand, or any other Member, where it
scarce ever fails of immediately producing
the desired Effect. 



In which our Travellers meet with a very extraordinary
Adventure. 
Just as Jones and his Friend came to the
End of their Dialogue in the preceding
Chapter, they arrived at the Bottom of a
very steep Hill. Here Jones stopt short,
and directing his Eyes upwards, stood for
a while silent. At length he called to his
Companion, and said, ‘Partridge, I wish
I was at the Top of this Hill; it must
certainly afford a most charming Prospect,
especially by this Light: For the solemn
Gloom which the Moon casts on all Objects,
is beyond Expression beautiful, especially
to an Imagination which is desirous
of cultivating melancholy Ideas.’ 
‘Very probably,’ answered Partridge; 
‘but if the Top of the Hill be properest to
produce melancholy Thoughts, I suppose 

the Bottom is the likeliest to produce
merry ones, and these I take to be much
the better of the two. I protest you have
made my Blood run cold with the very
mentioning the Top of that Mountain; 
which seems to me to be one of the highest
in the World. No, no, if we look
for any thing, let it be for a Place under
Ground, to screen ourselves from the
Frost. —Do so, said Jones, let it be but
within Hearing of this Place, and I will
hollow to you at my Return back.’ ‘Surely,
Sir, you are not mad,’ said Partridge. 
‘Indeed I am,’ answered Jones, ‘if ascending
this Hill be Madness: But as you
complain so much of the Cold already, I
would have you stay below. I will certainly
return to you within an Hour.’ 
‘Pardon me, Sir,’ cries Partridge, ‘I have
determined to follow you where-ever you
go.’ Indeed he was now afraid to stay
behind; for tho' he was Coward enough
in all Respects, yet his chief Fear was that
of Ghosts, with which the present Time
of Night, and the Wildness of the Place,
extremely well suited. 
At this Instant Partridge espied a glimmering
Light through some Trees, which
seemed very near to them. He immediately 

cried out in a Rapture, ‘Oh, Sir!
Heaven hath at last heard my Prayers,
and hath brought us to a House; perhaps
it may be an Inn. Let me beseech
you, Sir, if you have any Compassion
either for me or yourself, do not despise
the Goodness of Providence, but let us
go directly to yon Light. Whether it be
a Public-house or no, I am sure if they
be Christians that dwell there, they will
not refuse a little House-room to Persons
in our miserable Condition.’ Jones at
length yielded to the earnest Supplications of
Partridge, and both together made directly
towards the Place whence the Light issued. 
They soon arrived at the Door of this
House or Cottage: For it might be called
either, without much Impropriety. Here
Jones knocked several Times without receiving
any Answer from within; at which
Partridge, whose Head was full of nothing
but of Ghosts, Devils, Witches, and such
like, began to tremble, crying, ‘Lord have
Mercy upon us, sure the People must be
all dead. I can see no Light neither now,
and yet I am certain I saw a Candle
burning but a Moment before. —Well!
I have heard of such Things. —What hast
thou heard of, said Jones. The People 

are either fast asleep, or probably as this
is a lonely Place, are afraid to open their
Door.’ He then began to vociferate pretty
loudly, and at last an old Woman opening
an upper Casement, asked who they
‘were, and what they wanted?’ Jones answered,
‘they were Travellers who had lost
their Way, and having seen a Light in
the Window, had been led thither in
Hopes of finding some Fire to warm
themselves.’ ‘Whoever you are,’ cries the
Woman, ‘you have no Business here; nor
shall I open the Door to any body at
this Time of Night.’ Partridge, whom
the Sound of a human Voice had recovered
from his Fright, fell to the most earnest
Supplications to be admitted for a few Minutes
to the Fire, saying, ‘he was almost
dead with the Cold,’ to which Fear had
indeed contributed equally with the Frost. 
He assured her, that the Gentleman who
spoke to her, was one of the greatest Squires
in the Country, and made use of every
Argument save one, which Jones afterwards
effectually added, and this was the Promise
of Half a Crown. A Bribe too great
to be resisted by such a Person, especially
as the genteel Appearance of Jones, which
the Light of the Moon plainly discovered
to her, together with his affable Behaviour, 

had entirely subdued those Apprehensions
of Thieves which she had at first conceived. 
She agreed, therefore, at last to let them in,
where Partridge, to his infinite Joy, found
a good Fire ready for his Reception. 
The poor Fellow, however, had no
sooner warmed himself, than those Thoughts
which were always uppermost in his Mind,
began a little to disturb his Brain. There
was no Article of his Creed in which he had
a stronger Faith, than he had in Witchcraft,
nor can the Reader conceive a Figure
more adapted to inspire this Idea, than the
old Woman who now stood before him. 
She answered exactly to that Picture drawn
by Otway in his Orphan. Indeed if this
Woman had lived in the Reign of James
the First, her Appearance alone would have
hanged her, almost without any Evidence. 
Many Circumstances likewise conspired
to confirm Partridge in his Opinion. Her
living, as he then imagined, by herself in
so lonely a Place; and in a House, the Outside
of which seemed much too good for
her; but where the Inside was furnished in
the most neat and elegant Manner. To
say the Truth, Jones himself was not a little 

surprized at what he saw: For, besides the
extraordinary Neatness of the Room, it was
adorned with a great Number of Nicknacks,
and Curiosities, which might have engaged
the Attention of a Virtuoso. 
While Jones was admiring these Things,
and Partridge sat trembling with the firm
Belief that he was in the House of a Witch,
the old Woman said, ‘I hope, Gentlemen,
you will make what Haste you can; for
I expect my Master presently, and I would
not for double the Money he should find
you here.’ ‘Then you have a Master,’ 
cries Jones; ‘indeed you will excuse me,
good Woman, but I was surprized to see
all those fine Things in your House.’ ‘Ah,
Sir!’ said she, ‘if the twentieth Part of
these Things were mine, I should think
myself a rich Woman; but pray, Sir,
do not stay much longer: For I look for
him in every Minute.’ —‘Why sure he
would not be angry with you,’ said Jones,
‘for doing a common Act of Charity. 
Alack-a-day, Sir,’ said she, ‘he is a
strange Man, not at all like other People. 
He keeps no Company with any
Body, and seldom walks out but by Night,
for he doth not care to be seen; and all
the Country People are as much afraid of 

meeting him; for his Dress is enough to
frighten those who are not used to it. 
They call him, The Man of the Hill (for
there he walks by Night) and the Country
People are not, I believe, more afraid
of the Devil himself. He would be terribly
angry if he found you here.’ ‘Pray,
Sir,’ says Partridge, ‘don't let us offend
the Gentleman, I am ready to walk, and
was never warmer in my Life. —Do,
pray Sir, let us go—here are Pistols over
the Chimney; who knows whether they
be charged or no, or what he may do
with them.’ ‘Fear nothing, Partridge,’ 
cries Jones, ‘I will secure thee from Danger.’ 
—‘Nay, for Matter o' that, he never
doth any Mischief,’ said the Woman; 
‘but to be sure it is necessary he should
keep some Arms for his own Safety; for
his House hath been beset more than once,
and it is not many Nights ago, that we
thought, we heard Thieves about it: for
my own Part, I have often wondered that
he is not murdered by some Villain or
other, as he walks out by himself at such
Hours; but then, as I said, the People
are afraid of him, and besides they think,
I suppose, he hath nothing about him
worth taking.’ ‘I should imagine, by
this Collection of Rarities,’ cries Jones, 

‘that your Master had been a Traveller.’ 
‘Yes, Sir,’ answered she, ‘he hath been a
very great one; there be few Gentlemen
that know more of all Matters than
he; I fancy he hath been crost in Love,
or whatever it is, I know not, but I have
lived with him above these thirty Years,
and in all that Time he hath hardly spoke
to six living People.’ She then again solicited
their Departure, in which she was
backed by Partridge; but Jones purposely
protracted the time: For his Curiosity was
greatly raised to see this extraordinary Person. 
Tho' the old Woman, therefore,
concluded every one of her Answers with
desiring him to be gone, and Partridge proceeded
so far as to pull him by the Sleeve,
he still continued to invent new Questions,
till the old Woman with an affrighted Countenance,
declared she heard her Master's
Signal; and at the same Instant more than
one Voice was heard without the Door,
crying, ‘D&wblank;n your Blood, shew us your
Money this Instant. Your Money, you
Villain, or we will blow your Brains about
your Ears.’ 
‘O, good Heaven!’ cries the old Woman. 
‘Some Villains, to be sure, have
attacked my Master. O la! what shall I 

do? what shall I do?’ ‘How, cries
Jones, how—Are these Pistols loaded?’ 
‘O, Good Sir, there is nothing in them,
indeed—O, pray don't murder us, Gentlemen’ 
(for in reality she now had the
same Opinion of those within, as she had of
those without.) Jones made her no Answer; 
but snatching an old Broad-sword which
hung in the Room, he instantly sallied out,
where he found the old Gentleman struggling
with two Ruffians, and begging for
Mercy. Jones asked no Questions, but fell
so briskly to work with his Broad-sword,
that the Fellows immediately quitted their
Hold, and without offering to attack our
Hero, betook themselves to their Heels, and
made their Escape; for he did not attempt
to pursue them, being contented with having
delivered the old Gentleman; and indeed
he concluded he had pretty well done
their Business: For both of them, as they
ran off, cried out with bitter Oaths, that
they were dead Men. 
Jones presently ran to lift up the old
Gentleman, who had been thrown down in
the Scuffle, expressing at the same Time
great Concern, lest he should have received
any Harm from the Villains. The old
Man stared a Moment at Jones, and then 

cried,—‘No, Sir, no, I have very little
Harm, I thank you. Lord have Mercy
upon me.’ ‘I see, Sir,’ said Jones, ‘you
are not free from Apprehensions even of
those who have had the Happiness to be
your Deliverers; nor can I blame any
Suspicions which you may have; but indeed,
you have no real Occasion for any; 
here are none but your Friends present. 
Having mist our Way this cold Night,
we took the Liberty of warming ourselves
at your Fire, whence we were just departing
when we heard you call for Assistance,
which I must say, Providence
alone seems to have sent you.’ —‘Providence
indeed,’ cries the old Gentlemen,
‘if it be so.’ —‘So it is, I assure you,’ cries
Jones, ‘here is your own Sword, Sir. 
I have used it in your Defence, and I
now return it into your own Hand.’ The
old Man having received the Sword, which
was stained with the Blood of his Enemies,
looked stedfastly at Jones during some Moments,
and then with a Sigh, cried out,
‘You will pardon me, young Gentleman,
I was not always of a suspicious Temper,
nor am I a Friend to Ingratitude.’ ‘Be
thankful then,’ cries Jones, ‘to that Providence
to which you owe your Deliverance; 
as to my Part, I have only discharged 

the common Duties of Humanity,
and what I would have done for
any Fellow Creature in your Situation.’ 
‘Let me look at you a little longer,’ cries
the old Gentleman—‘You are a human
Creature then? —‘Well, perhaps, you are. 
Come, pray walk into my little Hutt. 
You have been my Deliverer indeed. 
The old Woman was distracted between
the Fears which she had of her Master, and
for him; and Partridge was, if possible, in
a greater Fright. The former of these,
however, when she heard her Master speak
kindly to Jones, and perceived what had
happened, came again to herself; but Partridge
no sooner saw the Gentleman, than
the Strangeness of his Dress infused greater
Terrors into that poor Fellow, than he
had before felt either from the strange Description
which he had heard, or from the
Uproar which had happened at the Door. 
To say the Truth, it was an Appearance
which might have affected a more constant
Mind than that of Mr. Partridge. This
Person was of the tallest Size, with a long
Beard as white as Snow. His Body was
cloathed with the Skin of an Ass, made something
into the Form of a Coat. He wore 

likewise Boots on his Legs, and a Cap on
his Head, both composed of the Skin of
some other Animals. 
As soon as the old Gentleman came into
his House, the old Woman began her
Congratulations on his happy Escape from
the Ruffians. ‘Yes,’ cried he, ‘I have
escaped indeed, Thanks to my Preserver.’ 
‘O the Blessing on him,’ answered she, ‘he
is a good Gentleman, I warrant him. 
I was afraid your Worship would have
been angry with me for letting him in; 
and to be certain I should not have done
it, had not I seen by the Moon-light, that
he was a Gentleman, and almost frozen
to Death. And to be certain it must
have been some good Angel that sent him
hither, and tempted me to do it.’ 
‘I am afraid, Sir,’ said the old Gentleman
‘to Jones, that I have nothing in
this House which you can either eat or
drink, unless you will accept a Dram of
Brandy; of which I can give you some
most excellent, and which I have had by
me these thirty Years.’ Jones declined
this Offer in a very civil and proper Speech,
and then the other asked him ‘Whither he
was travelling when he mist his Way; 

saying, I must own myself surprized to
see such a Person as you appear to be
journeying on Foot at this Time of
Night. I suppose, Sir, you are a Gentleman
of these Parts: for you do not
look like one who is used to travel far
without Horses.’ 
‘Appearances,’ cried Jones, ‘are often
deceitful; Men sometimes look like what
they are not. I assure you, I am not of
this Country, and whither I am travelling,
in reality I scarce know myself.’ 
‘Whoever you are, or whithersoever you
are going, answered the old Man, I have
Obligations to you which I can never return.’ 
‘I once more,’ replied Jones, ‘affirm,
that you have none: For there can be
no Merit in having hazarded that in your
Service on which I set no Value. And
nothing is so contemptible in my Eyes as
Life.’ 
‘I am sorry, young Gentleman,’ answered
the Stranger, ‘that you have any
Reason to be so unhappy at your Years.’ 

‘Indeed I am, Sir,’ answered Jones, ‘the
most unhappy of Mankind.’ —‘Perhaps
you have had a Friend, or a Mistress,’ 
replied the other. ‘How could you,’ cries
Jones, ‘mention two Words sufficient to
drive me to Distraction?’ ‘Either of
them are enough to drive any Man to
Distraction,’ answered the old Man. ‘I
enquire no farther, Sir. Perhaps my Curiosity
hath led me too far already.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ cries Jones, ‘I cannot censure
a Passion, which I feel at this Instant
in the highest Degree. You will
pardon me, when I assure you, that every
Thing which I have seen or heard since I
first entered this House, hath conspired
to raise the greatest Curiosity in me. 
Something very extraordinary must have
determined you to this Course of Life,
and I have reason to fear your own History
is not without Misfortunes.’ 
Here the old Gentleman again sighed,
and remained silent for some Minutes; at
last, looking earnestly on Jones, he said,
‘I have read that a good Countenance is a
Letter of Recommendation; if so, none
ever can be more strongly recommended
than yourself. If I did not feel some 

Yearnings towards you from another Consideration,
I must be the most ungrateful
Monster upon Earth; and I am really concerned
it is no otherwise in my Power,
than by Words, to convince you of my
Gratitude.’ 
Jones after a Moment's Hesitation, answered,
‘That it was in his Power by
Words to gratify him extremely. I have
confest a Curiosity, said he, Sir; need I
say how much obliged I should be to
you, if you would condescend to gratify
it? Will you suffer me therefore to beg,
unless any Consideration restrains you,
that you would be pleased to acquaint me
what Motives have induced you thus to
withdraw from the Society of Mankind,
and to betake yourself to a Course of Life
to which it sufficiently appears you was
not born?’ 
‘I scarce think myself at Liberty to refuse
you any thing, after what hath happened,’ 
replied the old Man, ‘If you
desire therefore to hear the Story of an
unhappy Man, I will relate it to you. 
Indeed you judge rightly, in thinking
there is commonly something extraordinary 

in the Fortunes of those who fly
from Society: For however it may seem
a Paradox, or even a Contradiction, certain
it is that great Philanthropy chiefly
inclines us to avoid and detest Mankind; 
not on Account so much of their private
and selfish Vices, but for those of a relative
Kind; such as Envy, Malice, Treachery,
Cruelty, with every other Species
of Malevolence. These are the Vices
which true Philanthropy abhors, and
which rather than see and converse with,
she avoids Society itself. However, without
a Compliment to you, you do not
appear to me one of those whom I should
shun or detest; nay, I must say, in what
little hath dropt from you, there appears
some Parity in our Fortunes; I hope
however yours will conclude more successfully.’ 
Here some Compliments passed between our
Heroe and his Host, and then the latter was
going to begin his History, when Partridge interrupted
him. His Apprehensions had now
pretty well left him; but some Effects of
his Terrors remained; he therefore reminded
the Gentleman of that excellent Brandy
which he had mentioned. This was presently 

brought, and Partridge swallowed a
large Bumper. 
The Gentleman then, without any farther
Preface, began as you may read in the next
Chapter. 



In which the Man of the Hill begins to relate
his History. 
‘I was born in a Village of Somersetshire,
called Mark, in the Year 1657; my
Father was one of those whom they call
Gentlemen Farmers. He had a little
Estate of about 300l. a Year of his own,
and rented another Estate of near the
same Value. He was prudent and industrious,
and so good a Husbandman,
that he might have led a very easy and
comfortable Life, had not an errant Vixen
of a Wife soured his domestic Quiet. But
tho' this Circumstance perhaps made him
miserable, it did not make him poor: 
For he confined her almost entirely at
Home, and rather chose to bear eternal
Upbraidings in his own House, than to
injure his Fortune by indulging her in the
Extravagancies she desired abroad.’ 

‘By this Xantippe (so was the Wife of
Socrates called, said Partridge) ‘By this
Xantippe he had two Sons, of which I
was the younger. He designed to give
us both good Educations; but my elder
Brother, who, unhappily for him, was
the Favourite of my Mother, utterly neglected
his Learning; insomuch that after
having been five or six Years at
School with little or no Improvement,
my Father being told by his Master, that
it would be to no Purpose to keep him
longer there, at last complied with my
Mother in taking him home from the
Hands of that Tyrant, as she called his
Master; though indeed he gave the Lad
much less Correction than his Idleness deserved,
but much more, it seems, than
the young Gentleman liked, who constantly
complained to his Mother of his
severe Treatment, and she as constantly
gave him a Hearing.’ 
“Yes, yes,’ cries Partridge, “I have
seen such Mothers; I have been abused
myself by them, and very unjustly; such
Parents deserve Correction as much
as their Children.” 

Jones chid the Pedagogue for this Interruption,
and then the Stranger proceeded. 
‘My Brother now at the Age of fifteen,
bid adieu to all Learning, and to
every Thing else but to his Dog and Gun,
with which latter he became so expert,
that, though perhaps you may think it
incredible, he could not only hit a standing
Mark with great Certainty; but hath
actually shot a Crow as it was flying in the
Air. He was likewise excellent at finding
a Hare sitting, and was soon reputed
one of the best Sportsmen in the
Country. A Reputation which both he
and his Mother enjoyed as much as if
he had been thought the finest Scholar. 
‘The Situation of my Brother made me
at first think my Lot the harder, in being
continued at School; but I soon changed
my Opinion; for as I advanced pretty
fast in Learning, my Labours became
easy, and my Exercise so delightful, that
Holidays were my most unpleasant Time: 
For my Mother, who never loved me,
now apprehending that I had the greater
Share of my Father's Affection, and finding,
or at least thinking, that I was more
taken Notice of by some Gentlemen of 

Learning, and particularly by the Parson
of the Parish, than my Brother, she now
hated my Sight, and made Home so disagreeable
to me, that what is called by
Schoolboys Black Monday, was to me
the whitest in the whole Year. 
‘Having, at length, gone through the
School at Taunton, I was thence removed
to Exeter College in Oxford, where I
remained four Years; at the End of
which an Accident happened, that put
a final End to my Studies, and whence I
may truly date the Rise of all which happened
to me afterwards in Life. 
‘There was at the same College with
myself one Sir George Gresham, a young
Fellow who was intitled to a very considerable
Fortune; which he was not, by
the Will of his Father, to come into full
Possession of till he arrived at the Age of
Twenty-five. However, the Liberality
of his Guardians gave him little Cause to
regret the abundant Caution of his Father:
for they allowed him Five hundred Pound
a Year while he remained at the University,
where he kept his Horses and his
Whore, and lived as wicked and as prostitute 
a Life, as he could have done, had 

he been never so entirely Master of his
Fortune; for besides the Five hundred
a Year which he received from his Guardians,
he found Means to spend a thousand
more. He was above the Age of
Twenty-one, and had no Difficulty of
gaining what Credit he pleased. 
‘This young Fellow, among many other
tolerably bad Qualities, had one very diabolical. 
He had a great Delight in destroying
and ruining the Youth of inferior
Fortune, by drawing them into Expences
which they could not afford so
well as himself; and the better, and worthier,
and soberer, any young Man was,
the greater Pleasure and Triumph had he
in his Destruction. Thus acting the
Character which is recorded of the Devil,
and going about seeking whom he might
devour. 
‘It was my Misfortune to fall into an
Acquaintance and Intimacy with this Gentleman. 
My Reputation of Diligence in
my Studies made me a desirable Object
of his mischievous Intention; and my
own Inclination made it sufficiently easy
for him to effect his Purpose; for tho' I
had applied myself with much Industry 

to Books, in which I took great Delight,
there were other Pleasures in which I was
capable of taking much greater; for I was
high-mettled, had a violent Flow of animal
Spirits, was a little ambitious, and
extremely amorous. 
‘I had not long contracted an Intimacy
with Sir George, before I became a Partaker
of all his Pleasures; and when I was
once entered on that Scene, neither my
Inclination, nor my Spirit, would suffer
me to play an Under-Part. I was second
to none of the Company in any Acts of
Debauchery; nay, I soon distinguished
myself so notably in all Riots and Disorders,
that my Name generally stood
first in the Roll of Delinquents, and
instead of being lamented as the unfortunate
Pupil of Sir George, I was now accused
as the Person who had misled and
debauched that hopeful young Gentleman; 
for tho' he was the Ring-leader
and Promoter of all the Mischief, he was
never so considered. I fell at last under
the Censure of the Vice-Chancellor, and
very narrowly escaped Expulsion. 
‘You will easily believe, Sir, that such
a Life as I am now describing must be 

incompatible with my further Progress in
Learning; and that in Proportion as I addicted
myself more and more to loose
Pleasure, I must grow more and more
remiss in Application to my Studies. This
was truly the Consequence; but this was
not all. My Expences now greatly exceeded
not only my former Income, but
those Additions which I extorted from
my poor generous Father, by Pretences
of Sums being necessary for preparing for
my approaching Degree of Batchelor of
Arts. These Demands, however, grew
at last so frequent and exorbitant, that
my Father, by slow Degrees, opened his
Ears to the Accounts which he received
from many Quarters of my present Behaviour,
and which my Mother failed not
to eccho very faithfully and loudly; adding,
“Ay, this is the fine Gentleman,
the Scholar who doth so much Honour
to his Family, and is to be the Making
of it. I thought what all his Learning
would come to. He is to be the Ruin
of us all, I find, after his elder Brother
hath been denied Necessaries for his Sake,
to perfect his Education forsooth, for
which he was to pay us such Interest; I
thought what the Interest would come
to;” with much more of the same Kind; 

but I have, I believe, satisfied you with
this Taste. 
‘My Father, therefore, began now to
return Remonstrances, instead of Money,
to my Demands, which brought my Affairs,
perhaps a little sooner to a Crisis; 
but had he remitted me his whole Income,
you will imagine it could have sufficed
a very short Time to support one
who kept Pace with the Expences of Sir
George Gresham. 
‘It is more than possible, that the Distress
I was now in for Money, and the
Impracticability of going on in this Manner,
might have restored me at once to my
Senses, and to my Studies, had I opened my
Eyes, before I became involved in Debts,
from which I saw no Hopes of ever extricating
myself. This was indeed the great
Art of Sir George, and by which he accomplished
the Ruin of many, whom he
afterwards laughed at as Fools and Coxcombs,
for vying, as he called it, with
a Man of his Fortune. To bring this
about, he would now and then advance a
little Money himself, in order to support
the Credit of the unfortunate Youth with 

other People; till, by Means of that very
Credit, he was irretrievably undone. 
‘My Mind being, by these Means,
grown as desperate as my Fortune, there
was scarce a Wickedness which I did not
meditate, in order for my Relief. Self-murder
itself became the Subject of my serious
Deliberation; and I had certainly resolved
on it, had not a more shameful, tho'
perhaps less sinful, Thought, expelled it
from my Head.’ Here he hesitated a
Moment, and then cried out, ‘I protest,
so many Years have not washed away the
Shame of this Act, and I shall blush while
I relate it.’ ‘Jones desired him to pass
over any thing that might give him Pain
in the Relation;’ but Partridge eagerly
cried out, ‘O pray, Sir, let us hear this,
I had rather hear this than all the rest; 
as I hope to be saved, I will never mention
a Word of it.’ Jones was going to
rebuke him, but the Stranger prevented it by
proceeding thus. ‘I had a Chum, a very
prudent, frugal young Lad, who, tho'
he had no very large Allowance, had by
his Parsimony heaped up upwards of forty
Guineas, which I knew he kept in his
Escritore. I took therefore an Opportunity
of purloining his Key from his Breeches 

Pocket while he was asleep, and thus
made myself Master of all his Riches. 
After which I again conveyed his Key
into his Pocket, and counterfeiting Sleep,
tho' I never once closed my Eyes, lay in
Bed till after he arose and went to
Prayers, an Exercise to which I had long
been unaccustomed. 
‘Timorous Thieves, by extreme Caution,
often subject themselves to Discoveries,
which those of a bolder Kind
escape. Thus it happened to me; for
had I boldly broke open his Escritore, I
had, perhaps, escaped even his Suspicion; 
but as it was plain that the Person who
robbed him had possessed himself of his
Key, he had no Doubt, when he first
missed his Money, but that his Chum was
certainly the Thief. Now as he was of a
fearful Disposition, and much my Inferior
in Strength, and, I believe, in Courage,
he did not dare to confront me
with my Guilt, for fear of worse bodily
Consequences which might happen to him. 
He repaired therefore immediately to the
Vice Chancellor, and, upon swearing to
the Robbery, and to the Circumstances
of it, very easily obtained a Warrant 

against one who had now so bad a Character
through the whole University. 
‘Luckily for me I lay out of the College
the next Evening; for that Day I attended
a young Lady in a Chaise to Whitney,
where we staid all Night; and in our Return
the next Morning to Oxford, I met
one of my Cronies, who acquainted me
with sufficient News concerning myself to
make me turn my Horse another Way.’ 
‘Pray Sir, did he mention any thing
of the Warrant,’ said Partridge? But
Jones begged the Gentleman to proceed
without regarding any impertinent Questions; 
which he did as follows. 
‘Having now abandoned all Thoughts
of returning to Oxford, the next Thing
which offered itself was a Journey to London. 
I imparted this Intention to my
female Companion, who at first remonstrated
against it, but upon producing my
Wealth, she immediately consented. We
then struck across the Country into the
great Cirencester Road, and made such
Haste, that we spent the next Evening
(save one) in London. 

‘When you consider the Place where I
now was, and the Company with whom
I was, you will, I fancy, conceive that a
very short Time brought me to an End
of that Sum of which I had so iniquitously
possessed myself. 
‘I was now reduced to a much higher
Degree of Distress than before; the Necessaries
of Life began to be numbred
among my Wants; and what made
my Case still the more grievous, was,
that my Paramour, of whom I was now
grown immoderately fond, shared the
same Distresses with myself. To see a
Woman you love in Distress; to be unable
to relieve her, and at the same Time
to reflect that you have brought her into
this Situation, is, perhaps, a Curse of
which no Imagination can represent the
Horrors to those who have not felt it.’ 
‘I believe it from my Soul,’ cries Jones,
‘and I pity you from the Bottom of my
Heart.’ He then took two or three disorderly
Turns about the Room, and at last
begged Pardon, and flung himself into his
Chair, crying, ‘I thank Heaven I have
escaped that.’ 

‘This Circumstance,’ continued the
Gentleman, ‘so severely aggravated the
Horrors of my present Situation, that
they became absolutely intolerable. I
could with less Pain endure the raging of
my own natural unsatisfied Appetites, even
Hunger or Thirst, than I could submit to
leave ungratified the most whimsical Desires
of a Woman, on whom I so extravagantly
doated, that tho' I knew she
had been the Mistress of half my Acquaintance,
I firmly intended to marry
her. But the good Creature was unwilling
to consent to an Action which the
World might think so much to my Disadvantage. 
And as, possibly, she compassionated
the daily Anxieties which she
must have perceived me suffer on her Account,
she resolved to put an End to my
Distress. She soon, indeed, found Means
to relieve me from my troublesome and
perplexed Situation: For while I was
distracted with various Inventions to supply
her with Pleasures, she very kindly— 
betrayed me to one of her former Lovers
at Oxford, by whose Care and Diligence I
was immediately apprehended and committed
to Goal. 

‘Here I first began seriously to reflect on
the Miscarriages of my former Life; on
the Errors I had been guilty of; on the
Misfortunes which I had brought on myself; 
and on the Grief which I must have
occasioned to one of the best of Fathers. 
When I added to all these the Perfidy of
my Mistress, such was the Horror of my
Mind, that Life, instead of being longer
desirable, grew the Object of my Abhorrence,
and I could have gladly embraced
Death, as my dearest Friend, if it had
offered itself to my Choice unattended by
Shame. 
‘The Time of the Assizes soon came,
and I was removed by Habeas Corpus to
Oxford, where I expected certain Conviction
and Condemnation; but, to my
great Surprize, none appeared against
me, and I was, at the End of the Sessions,
discharged for Want of Prosecution. 
In short, my Chum had left Oxford,
and whether from Indolence, or
from what other Motive, I am ignorant,
had declined concerning himself any farther
in the Affair.’ 

‘Perhaps,’ cries Partridge, ‘he did
not care to have your Blood upon his
Hands, and he was in the right on't. 
If any Person was to hanged upon my
Evidence, I should never be able to lie
alone afterwards, for Fear of seeing his
Ghost.’ 
‘I shall shortly doubt, Partridge,’ says
Jones, whether thou art more brave or
wise. ‘You may laugh at me, Sir, if
you please,’ answered Partridge, ‘but
if you will hear a very short Story which
I can tell, and which is most certainly
true, perhaps you may change your Opinion.’ 
In the Parish where I was born––– 
Here Jones would have silenced him, but
the Stranger interceded that he might be
permitted to tell his Story, and in the mean
time promised to recollect the Remainder of
his own. 
Partridge then proceeded thus. ‘In the
Parish where I was born, there lived a
Farmer whose Name was Bridle, and he
had a Son named Francis, a good hopeful
young Fellow; I was at the Grammar
School with him, where I remember
he was got into Ovid's Epistles, and 

he could construe you three Lines together
sometimes without looking into a
Dictionary. Besides all this, he was a
very good Lad, never missed Church o'
Sundays, and was reckoned one of the
best Psalm-Singers in the whole Parish. 
He would indeed now and then take a
Cup too much, and that was the only
Fault he had.’ —‘Well, but come to
the Ghost,’ cries Jones. ‘Never fear,
Sir, I shall come to him soon enough,’ 
answered Partridge. ‘You must know
then, that Farmer Bridle lost a Mare, a
sorrel one to the best of my Remembrance,
and so it fell out, that this young
Francis shortly afterward being at a Fair
at Hindon, and as I think it was on—I can't
remember the Day; and being as he was,
what should he happen to meet, but a
Man upon his Father's Mare. Frank
called out presently, Stop Thief; and it
being in the Middle of the Fair, it was
impossible, you know, for the Man to
make his Escape. So they apprehended
him, and carried him before the Justice,
I remember it was Justice Willoughby of
Noyle, a very worthy good Gentleman,
and he committed him to Prison, and
bound Frank in a Recognizance, I
think they call it, a hard Word compounded 

of re and cognosco, but it differs
in its Meaning from the Use of the
Simple, as many other Compounds do. 
Well, at last, down came my Lord Justice
Page to hold the Assizes, and so the
Fellow was had up, and Frank was had
up for a Witness. To be sure I shall
never forget the Face of the Judge, when
he begun to ask him what he had to say
against the Prisoner. He made poor
Frank tremble and shake in his Shoes. 
Well, you Fellow, says my Lord, what
have you to say? Don't stand humming
and hawing, but speak out; but
however he soon turned altogether as
civil to Frank, and began to thunder at
the Fellow; and when he asked him, if
he had any Thing to say for himself,
the Fellow said he had found the Horse. 
Ay!’ answered the Judge, ‘thou art
a lucky Fellow; I have travelled the
Circuit these forty Years, and never
found a Horse in my Life; but I'll tell
thee what, Friend, thou wast more lucky
than thou didst know of: For thou didst
not only find a Horse; but a Halter
too, I promise thee. To be sure I shall
never forget the Word. Upon which every
Body fell a laughing, as how could they help
it. Nay, and twenty other Jests he made 

which I can't remember now. There
was something about his Skill in Horse
Flesh, which made all the Folks laugh. 
To be certain the Judge must have been
a very brave Man, as well as a Man of
much Learning. It is indeed charming
Sport to hear Trials upon Life and Death. 
One Thing I own I thought a little hard,
that the Prisoner's Counsel was not suffered
to speak for him, though he desired
only to be heard one very short Word; 
but my Lord would not hearken to him,
though he suffered a Counsellor to talk
against him for above half an Hour. I
thought it hard, I own, that there should
be so many of them; my Lord, and the
Court, and the Jury, and the Counsellors,
and the Witnesses all upon one poor
Man, and he too in Chains. Well, the
Fellow was hanged, as to be sure it cou'd
be no otherwise, and poor Frank could
never be easy about it. He never was in
the dark alone, but he fancied he saw the
Fellow's Spirit. Well, and is this thy
Story, cries Jones? No, no, answer'd Partridge,
O Lord have Mercy upon me,— 
I am just now coming to the Matter; for
one Night, coming from the Alehouse
in a long narrow dark Lane, there he ran
directly up against him, and the Spirit 

was all in white and fell upon Frank, and
Frank who is a sturdy Lad, fell upon the
Spirit again, and there they had a Tussel
together, and poor Frank was dreadfully
beat; indeed he made a shift at last to
crawl Home, but what with the beating,
and what with the Fright, he lay ill above
a Fortnight; and all this is most
certainly true, and the whole Parish will
bear Witness to it.’ 
The Stranger smiled at this Story, and
Jones burst into a loud Fit of Laughter,
upon which Partridge cried, ‘Ay, you may
laugh, Sir, and so did some others, particularly
a Squire, who is thought to be
no better than an Atheist; who forsooth,
because there was a Calf with a white
Face found dead in the same Lane the
next Morning, would fain have it, that
the Battle was between Frank and that,
as if a Calf would set upon a Man. Besides,
Frank told me he knew it to be a
Spirit, and could swear to him in any
Court in Christendom, and he had not
drank above a Quart or two, or such a
Matter of Liquor at the time. Lud have
Mercy upon us, and keep us all from
dipping our Hands in Blood, I say.’ 

‘Well, Sir,’ said Jones to the Stranger,
‘Mr. Partridge hath finished his Story, and
I hope will give you no future Interruption,
if you will be so kind to proceed. 
He then resumed his Narration; but as he
hath taken Breath for a while, we think
proper to give it to our Reader, and shall
therefore put an End to this Chapter.’ 



In which the Man of the Hill continues his
History. 
‘I had now regained my Liberty, said
the Stranger, but I had lost my Reputation; 
for there is a wide Difference between
the Case of a Man who is barely acquitted
of a Crime in a Court of Justice,
and of him who is acquitted in his own
Heart, and in the Opinion of the People. I
was conscious of my Guilt, and ashamed to
look any one in the Face, so resolved to
leave Oxford the next Morning, before the
Daylight discovered me to the Eyes of
any Beholders.’ 
‘When I had got clear of the City, it
first entered into my Head to return Home 

to my Father, and endeavour to obtain his
Forgiveness; but as I had no Reason to
doubt his Knowledge of all which had past,
and as I was well assured of his great Aversion
to all Acts of Dishonesty, I could
entertain no Hopes of being received by
him, especially since I was too certain of
all the good Offices in the Power of my
Mother: Nay, had my Father's Pardon
been as sure, as I conceived his Resentment
to be, I yet question whether I could have
had the Assurance to behold him, or whether
I could, upon any Terms, have submitted
to live and converse with those, who,
I was convinced, knew me to have been
guilty of so base an Action. 
‘I hastened therefore back to London, the
best Retirement of either Grief or Shame,
unless for Persons of a very public Character; 
for here you have the Advantage of
Solitude without its Disadvantage, since you
may be alone and in Company at the same
Time; and while you walk or sit unobserved,
Noise, Hurry, and a constant Succession
of Objects, entertain the Mind,
and prevent the Spirits from preying on
themselves, or rather on Grief or Shame,
which are the most unwholesome Diet in
the World; and on which (though there 

are many who never taste either but in
public) there are some who can feed very
plentifully, and very fatally when alone. 
‘But as there is scarce any human Good
without its concomitant Evil, so there are
People who find an Inconvenience in this
unobserving Temper of Mankind; I mean
Persons who have no Money; for as you
are not put out of Countenance, so neither
are you cloathed or fed by those who do
not know you. And a Man may be as
easily starved in Leadenhall Market as in
the Desarts of Arabia. 
‘It was at present my Fortune to be destitute
of that great Evil, as it is apprehended
to be by several Writers, who I suppose
were overburthened with it, namely,
Money.’ “With Submission, Sir, said Partridge,
I do not remember any Writers
who have called it Malorum; but Irritatamenta
Malorum. Effodiuntur opes irritamenta
Malorum.” Well, Sir, continued
the Stranger, whether it be an Evil, or
only the Cause of Evil, I was entirely
void of it, and at the same Time of
Friends, and as I thought of Acquaintance; 
when one Evening as I was passing
through the Inner Temple, very hungry 

and very miserable, I heard a Voice
on a sudden haling me with great Familiarity
by my Christian Name; and upon my
turning about, I presently recollected the
Person who so saluted me, to have been
my Fellow Collegiate; one who had left
the University above a Year, and long
before any of my Misfortunes had befallen
me. This Gentleman, whose Name was
Watson, shook me heartily by the Hand,
and expressing great Joy at meeting me,
proposed our immediately drinking a Bottle
together. I first declined the Proposal,
and pretended Business; but as he was
very earnest and pressing, Hunger at last
overcame my Pride, and I fairly confessed
to him I had no Money in my Pocket; 
yet not without framing a Lie for an Excuse,
and imputing it to my having
changed my Breeches that Morning. Mr.
Watson answered, “I thought, Jack, you
and I had been too old Acquaintance for
you to mention such a Matter. He then
took me by the Arm and was pulling me
along; but I gave him very little Trouble,
for my own Inclinations pulled me
much stronger than he could do.” 
‘We then went into the Friars, which
you know is the Scene of all Mirth and 

Jollity. Here when we arrived at the
Tavern, Mr. Watson applied himself to
the Drawer only, without taking the least
Notice of the Cook; for he had no Suspicion
but that I had dined long since. 
However, as the Case was really otherwise,
I forged another Falshood, and
told my Companion, I had been at the
further End of the City on Business of
Consequence, and had snapt up a Mutton
Chop in Haste, so that I was again hungry,
and wished he would add a Beef
Steak to his Bottle.’ ‘Some People,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘ought to have good
Memories, or did you find just Money
enough in your Breeches to pay for the
Mutton Chop?’ ‘Your Observation
is right,’ answered the Stranger, ‘and I
believe such Blunders are inseparable from
all dealing in Untruth. —But to proceed
—I began now to feel myself extremely
happy. The Meat and Wine soon revived
my Spirits to a high Pitch, and I
enjoyed much Pleasure in the Conversation
of my old Acquaintance, the rather, as
I thought him entirely ignorant of what
had happened at the University since his
leaving it. 

‘But he did not suffer me to remain long
in this agreeable Delusion; for taking a
Bumper in one Hand, and holding me
by the other, “Here, my Boy,” cries
he, “here's wishing you Joy of your being
so honourably acquitted of that Affair
laid to your Charge.” I was Thunderstruck
with Confusion at those Words,
which Watson observing, proceeded thus
—“Nay, never be ashamed, Man; thou
hast been acquitted, and no one now
dares call thee guilty; but prithee do tell
me, who am thy Friend, I hope thou
didst really rob him; for rat me if it was
not a meritorious Action to strip such a
sneaking pitiful Rascal, and instead of
the Two hundred Guineas, I wish you
had taken as many thousand. Come,
come, my Boy, don't be shy of confessing
to me, you are not now brought
before one of the Pimps. D&wblank;n me,
if I don't honour you for it; for, as I
hope for Salvation, I would have made
no manner of Scruple of doing the same
Thing.”’ 
‘This Declaration a little relieved my
Abashment, and as Wine had now somewhat
opened my Heart, I very freely acknowledged 

the Robbery, but acquainted
him that he had been misinformed as to
the Sum taken, which was little more
than a fifth Part of what he had mentioned. 
“I am sorry for it with all my Heart,” 
quoth he, “and I wish thee better Success
another Time. Tho' if you will take
my Advice, you shall have no Occasion
to run any such Risque. Here,” said
he, (taking some Dice out of his Pocket)
here's the Stuff. Here are the Implements; 
here are the little Doctors which
cure the Distempers of the Purse. Follow
but my Counsel, and I will shew
you a Way to empty the Pockets of a
Queer Cull, without any Danger of the
Nubbing Cheat.” 
‘Nubbing Cheat,’ cries Partridge, ‘Pray,
Sir, what is that?’ 
‘Why that, Sir,’ says the Stranger,
‘is a Cant Phrase for the Gallows; for as
Gamesters differ little from Highwaymen
in their Morals, so do they very much
resemble them in their Language. 

‘We had now each drank our Bottle,
when Mr. Watson said, the Board was sitting,
and that he must attend, earnestly
pressing me, at the same Time, to go
with him and try my Fortune. I
answered, He knew that was at present
out of my Power, as I had informed him
of the Emptiness of my Pocket. To say
the Truth, I doubted not, from his many
strong Expressions of Friendship, but
that he would offer to lend me a
small Sum for that Purpose; but he
answered, “Never mind that, Man,
e'en boldly run a Levant; (Partridge
was going to enquire the Meaning of that
Word; but Jones stopped his Mouth;)
but be circumspect as to the Man. I
will tip you the proper Person, which
may be necessary, as you do not know
the Town, nor can distinguish a Rum
Cull from a Queer one.”’ 
‘The Bill was now brought, when Watson
paid his Share, and was departing. I
reminded him, not without blushing, of
my having no Money.’ He answered,
“That signifies nothing, score it behind
the Door, or make a bold Brush, and
take no Notice—Or—stay,” says he,
“I will go down Stairs first, and then do,
you take up my Money, and score the 

whole Reckoning at the Bar, and I will
wait for you at the Corner.” ‘I expressed
some Dislike at this, and hinted my Expectations
that he would have deposited
the whole; but he swore he had not another
Sixpence in his Pocket. 
‘He then went down, and I was prevailed
on to take up the Money and follow
him, which I did close enough to
hear him tell the Drawer the Reckoning
was upon the Table. The Drawer passed
by me up Stairs; but I made such Haste
into the Street, that I heard nothing of
his Disappointment, nor did I mention a
Syllable at the Bar, according to my Instructions. 
‘We now went directly to the Gaming
Table, where Mr. Watson, to my Surprize,
pulled out a large Sum of Money,
and placed before him, as did many
others; all of them, no doubt, considering
their own Heaps as so many decoy
Birds, which were to entice and draw over
the Heaps of their Neighbours. 
‘Here it would be tedious to relate all
the Freaks which Fortune, or rather the
Dice, played in this her Temple. Mountains
of Gold were in a few Moments reduced 

to nothing at one Part of the
Table, and rose as suddenly in another. 
The Rich grew in a Moment
poor, and the Poor as suddenly became
rich; so that it seemed a Philosopher
could no where have so well instructed his
Pupils in the Contempt of Riches, at
least he could no where have better inculcated
the Incertainty of their Duration. 
‘For my own Part, after having considerably
improved my small Estate, I at
last entirely demolished it. Mr. Watson
too, after much Variety of Luck, rose
from the Table in some Heat, and declared
he had lost a cool hundred, and
would play no longer. Then coming up
to me, he asked me to return with him
to the Tavern; but I positively refused,
saying, I would not bring myself a second
Time into such a Dilemma, and especially
as he had lost all his Money, and was
now in my own Condition.’ “Pooh,” 
says he, “I have just borrowed a couple of
Guineas of a Friend; and one of them
is at your Service.” ‘He immediately
put one of them into my Hand, and I
no longer resisted his Inclination. 

‘I was at first a little shocked at returning
to the same House whence we had departed
in so unhandsome a Manner; but
when the Drawer, with very civil Address,
told us, “he believed we had forgot to
pay our Reckoning,” I became perfectly
easy, and very readily gave him a Guinea,
bid him pay himself, and acquiesced in
the unjust Charge which had been laid on
my Memory. 
‘Mr. Watson now bespoke the most extravagant
Supper he could well think of,
and tho' he had contented himself with
simple Claret before, nothing now but the
most precious Burgundy would serve his
Purpose.’ 
‘Our Company was soon encreased by
the Addition of several Gentlemen from
the Gaming-Table; most of whom, as
I afterwards found, came not to the Tavern
to drink, but in the Way of Business:
for the true Gamesters pretended to be ill,
and refused their Glass, while they plied
heartily two young Fellows, who were
to be afterwards pillaged, as indeed they
were without Mercy. Of this Plunder I
had the good Fortune to be a Sharer,
tho' I was not yet let into the Secret. 

‘There was one remarkable Accident
attended this Tavern Play; for the Money,
by Degrees, totally disappeared, so
that tho' at the Beginning the Table was
half covered with Gold, yet before the Play
ended, which it did not till the next
Day, being Sunday, at Noon, there was
scarce a single Guinea to be seen on the
Table; and this was the stranger, as
every Person present except myself declared
he had lost; and what was become
of the Money, unless the Devil himself
carried it away, is difficult to determine.’ 
‘Most certainly he did,’ says Partridge.
‘for evil Spirits can carry away any thing
without being seen, tho' there were never
so many Folk in the Room; and I
should not have been surprized if he had
carried away all the Company of a Set
of wicked Wretches, who were at play in
Sermon-time. And I could tell you a
true Story, if I would, where the Devil
took a Man out of Bed from another
Man's Wife, and carried him away
through the Key-hole of the Door. I've
seen the very House where it was done,
and no Body hath lived in it these thirty
Years.’ 

Tho' Jones was a little offended by the
Impertinence of Partridge, he could not
however avoid smiling at his Simplicity. 
The Stranger did the same, and then proceeded
with his Story, as will be seen in the
next Chapter. 



In which the foregoing Story is farther continued. 
‘My Fellow Collegiate had now entered
me in a new Scene of Life. 
I soon became acquainted with the whole
Fraternity of Sharpers, and was let into
their Secrets. I mean into the Knowledge
of those gross Cheats which are proper
to impose on the raw and unexperienced: 
For there are some Tricks of a
finer Kind, which are only known to a
few of the Gang, who are at the Head
of their Profession; a Degree of Honour
beyond my Expectation; for Drink, to
which I was immoderately addicted, and
the natural Warmth of my Passions, prevented
me from arriving at any great
Success in an Art, which requires as much 

Coolness as the most austere School of
Philosophy. 
‘Mr. Watson, with whom I now lived
in the closest Amity, had unluckily the
former Failing to a very great Excess; 
so that instead of making a Fortune by
his Profession, as some others did, he
was alternately rich and poor, and was
often obliged to surrender to his cooler
Friends over a Bottle which they never
tasted, that Plunder that he had taken
from Culls at the public Table. 
‘However, we both made a Shift to pick
up an uncomfortable Livelihood, and for
two Years I continued of the Calling,
during which Time I tasted all the Varieties
of Fortune; sometimes flourishing
in Affluence, and at others being obliged
to struggle with almost incredible Difficulties. 
To-day wallowing in Luxury,
and To-morrow reduced to the coarsest
and most homely Fare. My fine Clothes
being often on my Back in the Evening,
and at the Pawnshop the next Morning. 
‘One Night as I was returning Pennyless
from the Gaming-table, I observed
a very great Disturbance, and a large 

Mob gathered together in the Street. As
I was in no Danger from Pick-pockets, I
ventured into the Croud, where, upon Enquiry,
I found that a Man had been
robbed and very ill used by some Ruffians. 
The wounded Man appeared very
bloody, and seemed scarce able to support
himself on his Legs. As I had not
therefore been deprived of my Humanity
by my present Life and Conversation, tho'
they had left me very little of either
Honesty or Shame, I immediately offered
my Assistance to the unhappy Person,
who thankfully accepted it, and putting
himself under my Conduct, begged me
to convey him to some Tavern, where
he might send for a Surgeon, being, as
he said, faint with Loss of Blood. He
seemed indeed highly pleased at finding
one who appeared in the Dress of a Gentleman: 
For as to all the rest of the
Company present, their Outside was such
that he could not wisely place any Confidence
in them. 
‘I took the poor Man by the Arm, and
led him to the Tavern where we kept
our Rendezvous, as it happened to be
the nearest at Hand. A Surgeon happening
luckily to be in the House, immediately 

attended, and applied himself
to dressing his Wounds, which I had the
Pleasure to hear were not likely to be
mortal. 
‘The Surgeon having very expeditiously
and dextrously finished his Business,
began to enquire in what Part of the Town
the wounded Man lodged; who answered,
“That he was come to Town that very
Morning; that his Horse was at an Inn
in Piccadilly, and that he had no other
Lodging, and very little or no Acquaintance
in Town.” 
‘This Surgeon, whose Name I have forgot,
tho' I remember it began with an
R, had the first Character in his Profession,
and was Serjeant-Surgeon to the
King. He had moreover many good
Qualities, and was a very generous, good-natured
Man, and ready to do any Service
to his Fellow-Creatures. He offered
his Patient the Use of his Chariot to
carry him to his Inn, and at the same
Time whispered in his Ear, “That if he
wanted any Money, he would furnish
him.” 

‘The poor Man was not now capable of
returning Thanks for this generous Offer: 
For having had his Eyes for some Time
stedfastly on me, he threw himself back
in his Chair, crying, O, my Son! my
Son! and then fainted away. 
‘Many of the People present imagined
this Accident had happened through his
Loss of Blood; but I, who at the same
Time began to recollect the Features of
my Father, was now confirmed in my
Suspicion, and satisfied that it was he
himself who appeared before me. I presently
ran to him, raised him in my Arms,
and kissed his cold Lips with the utmost
Eagerness. Here I must draw a Curtain
over a Scene which I cannot describe: for
though I did not lose my Being, as my
Father for a while did, my Senses were
however so overpowered with Affright and
Surprize, that I am a Stranger to what
past during some Minutes, and indeed till
my Father had again recovered from his
Swoon, and I found myself in his Arms,
both tenderly embracing each other, while
the Tears trickled a-pace down the
Cheeks of each of us. 

‘Most of those present seemed affected
by this Scene, which we, who might be
considered as the Actors in it, were desirous
of removing from the Eyes of all
Spectators, as fast as we could; my Father
therefore accepted the kind Offer of
the Surgeon's Chariot, and I attended
him in it to his Inn. 
‘When we were alone together, he gently
upbraided me with having neglected
to write to him during so long a Time,
but entirely omitted the Mention of that
Crime which had occasioned it. He then
informed me of my Mother's Death, and
insisted on my returning Home with him,
saying, “That he had long suffered the
greatest Anxiety on my Account; that he
knew not whether he had most feared my
Death, or wished it; since he had so
many more dreadful Apprehensions
for me. At last he said, a neighbouring
Gentleman, who had just recovered
a Son from the same Place, informed
him where I was, and that to reclaim
me from this Course of Life, was
the sole Cause of his Journey to London.” 
He thanked Heaven he had succeeded so
far as to find me out by Means of an 

Accident which had like to have proved
fatal to him; and had the Pleasure to
think he partly owed his Preservation to
my Humanity, with which he profest himself
to be more delighted than he should
have been with my filial Piety, if I had
known that the Object of all my Care was
my own Father. 
‘Vice had not so depraved my Heart, as
to excite in it an Insensibility of so much
paternal Affection, tho' so unworthily bestowed. 
I presently promised to obey
his Commands in my return Home with
him as soon as he was able to travel,
which indeed he was in a very few Days,
by the Assistance of that excellent Surgeon
who had undertaken his Cure. 
‘The Day preceding my Father's Journey
(before which Time I scarce ever left
him) I went to take my Leave of some
of my most intimate Acquaintance, particularly
of Mr. Watson, who dissuaded
me from burying myself, as he called it,
out of a simple Compliance with the fond
Desires of a foolish old Fellow. Such
Solicitations, however, had no Effect, and
I once more saw my own Home. My
Father now greatly solicited me to think 

of Marriage; but my Inclinations were
utterly averse to any such Thoughts. I
had tasted of Love already, and perhaps
you know the extravagant Excesses of
that most tender and most violent Passion.’ 
Here the old Gentlemen paused, and looked
earnestly at Jones; whose Countenance
within a Minute's Space displayed the Extremities
of both red and white. Upon
which the old Man, without making any
Observations, renewed his Narrative. 
‘Being now provided with all the Necessaries
of Life, I betook myself once again
to Study, and that with a more inordinate
Application than I had ever done
formerly. The Books which now employed
my Time solely, were those, as
well ancient as modern, which treat of
true Philosophy, a Word, which is by
many thought to be the Subject only of
Farce and Ridicule. I now read over the
Works of Aristotle and Plato, with the
rest of those inestimable Treasures which
ancient Greece hath bequeathed to the
World. 
‘These Authors, though they instructed
me in no Science by which Men may promise
to themselves to acquire the least 

Riches, or worldly Power, taught me, however,
the Art of despising the highest Acquisitions
of both. They elevate the Mind,
and steel and harden it against the capricious
Invasions of Fortune. They not
only instruct in the Knowledge of Wisdom,
but confirm Men in her Habits, and demonstrate
plainly, that this must be our
Guide, if we propose ever to arrive at the
greatest worldly Happiness; or to defend
ourselves with any tolerable Security against
the Misery which every where surrounds
and invests us. 
‘To this I added another Study, compared
to which all the Philosophy taught by the
wisest Heathens is little better than a
Dream, and is indeed as full of Vanity
as the silliest Jester ever pleased to represent
it. This is that divine Wisdom
which is alone to be found in the Holy
Scriptures: for those  impart to us the Knowledge
and Assurance of Things much
more worthy our Attention, than all
which this World can offer to our Acceptance. 
Of Things which Heaven itself
hath condescended to reveal to us,
and to the smallest Knowledge of which
the highest human Wit unassisted could
never ascend. I began now to think 

all the Time I had spent with the best
Heathen Writers, was little more than
Labour lost: For however pleasant and
delightful their Lessons may be, or however
adequate to the right Regulation of
our Conduct with Respect to this World
only, yet when compared with the Glory
revealed in Scripture, their highest Documents
will appear as trifling, and of as
little Consequence as the Rules by which
Children regulate their childish little Games
and Pastime. True it is, that Philosophy
makes us wiser, but Christianity makes us
better Men. Philosophy elevates and
steels the Mind, Christianity softens and
sweetens it. The Former makes us the
Objects of human Admiration, the Latter
of Divine Love. That insures us a temporal,
but this an eternal Happiness. — 
But I am afraid I tire you with my Rhapsody.’ 
‘Not at all,’ cries Partridge, ‘Lud forbid
we should be tired with good Things.’ 
‘I had spent,’ continued the Stranger,
‘about four Years in the most delightful
Manner to myself, totally given up to
Contemplation, and entirely unembarrassed
with the Affairs of the World, when 

I lost the best of Fathers, and one whom
I so sincerely loved, that my Grief at his
Loss exceeds all Description. I now abandoned
my Books, and gave myself up for
a whole Month to the Efforts of Melancholy
and Despair. Time, however, the
best Physician of the Mind, at length
brought me Relief.’ ‘Ay, ay, Tempus
edax Rerum,’ said Partridge. ‘I then,’ 
continued the Stranger, ‘betook myself again
to my former Studies, which I may
say perfected my Cure: For Philosophy
and Religion may be called the Exercises
of the Mind, and when this is disordered
they are as wholesome as Exercise can
be to a distempered Body. They do indeed
produce similar Effects with Exercise: 
For they strengthen and confirm the
Mind; till Man becomes, in the noble
Strain of Horace, 

‘Fortis, & in seipso totus teres atq; rotundus,
‘Externi ne quid valeat per læve morari:
‘In quem manca ruit semper Fortuna.—* 

Here Jones smiled at some Conceit which
intruded itself into his Imagination; but the
Stranger, I believe, perceived it not, and proceeded
thus. 
‘My Circumstances were now greatly altered
by the Death of that best of Men: 
For my Brother, who was now become
Master of the House, differed so widely
from me in his Inclinations, and our Pursuits
in Life had been so very various, that
we were the worst of Company to each
other; but what made our living together
still more disagreeable, was the little Harmony
which could subsist between the few
who resorted to me, and the numerous
Train of Sportsmen who often attended
my Brother from the Field to the Table: 
For such Fellows, besides the Noise and
Nonsense with which they persecute the
Ears of sober Men, endeavour always to
attack them with Affront  and Contempt. 
This was so much the Case, that neither I
myself, nor my Friends, could ever sit
down to a Meal with them, without being
treated with Derision, because we were
unacquainted with the Phrases of Sportsmen. 
For Men of true Learning, and almost
universal Knowledge, always compassionate
the Ignorance of others: but
Fellows who excel in some little, low,
contemptible Art, are always certain to 

despise those who are unacquainted with
that Art. 
‘In short, we soon separated, and I went
by the Advice of a Physician to drink the
Bath Waters: For my violent Affliction,
added to a sedentary Life, had thrown
me into a kind of paralytic Disorder, for
which those Waters are accounted an almost
certain Cure. The second Day after
my Arrival, as I was walking by the River,
the Sun shone so intensely hot (tho' it
was early in the Year) that I retired to the
Shelter of some Willows, and sat down by
the River side. Here I had not been
seated long before I heard a Person on the
other Side the Willows, sighing and bemoaning
himself bitterly. On a sudden,
having uttered a most impious Oath, he
cried, “I am resolved to bear it no longer,” 
and directly threw himself into the Water. 
I immediately started, and ran towards the
Place, calling at the same Time as loudly
as I could for Assistance. An Angler happened
luckily to be a fishing a little below
me, tho' some very high Sedge had hid him
from my Sight. He immediately came
up, and both of us together, not without
some Hazard of our Lives, drew the Body
to the Shore. At first we perceived no Sign
of Life remaining; but having held the
Body up by the Heels (for we soon had 

Assistance enough) it discharged a vast
Quantity of Water at the Mouth, and at
length began to discover some Symptoms
of Breathing, and a little afterwards to
move both its Hands and its Legs. 
‘An Apothecary, who happened to be
present among others, advised that the
Body, which seemed now to have pretty
well emptied itself of Water, and which
began to have many convulsive Motions,
should be directly taken up, and carried
into a warm Bed. This was accordingly
performed, the Apothecary and myself attending. 
‘As we were going towards an Inn, for
we knew not the Man's Lodgings, luckily
a Woman met us, who, after some violent
Screaming, told us, that the Gentleman
lodged at her House. 
‘When I had seen the Man safely deposited
there, I left him to the Care of the
Apothecary, who, I suppose, used all the
right Methods with him; for the next
Morning I heard he had perfectly recovered
his Senses. 
‘I then went to visit him, intending to
search out as well as I could the Cause of
his having attempted so desperate an Act,
and to prevent as far as I was able, his pursuing
such wicked Intentions for the future. 
I was no sooner admitted into his Chamber, 

than we both instantly knew each
other; for who should this Person be, but
my good Friend Mr. Watson! Here I
will not trouble you with what past at our
first Interview: For I would avoid Prolixity
as much as possible.’ ‘Pray let us
hear all,’ cries Partridge, ‘I want mightily
to know what brought him to Bath.’ 
‘You shall hear every Thing material,’ 
answered the Stranger; and then proceeded
to relate what we shall proceed to write,
after we have given a short breathing Time
to both ourselves and the Reader. 



In which the Man of the Hill concludes his
History. 
‘Mr. Watson,’ continued the Stranger, ‘very freely acquainted me,
that the unhappy Situation of his Circumstances,
occasioned by a Tide of Ill-Luck,
had in a Manner forced him to a Resolution
of destroying himself. 
‘I now began to argue very seriously with
him, in Opposition to this Heathenish,
or indeed Diabolical Principle of the
Lawfulness of Self-Murder; and said
every Thing which occurred to me on the 

Subject; but to my great Concern, it
seemed to have very little Effect on him. 
He seemed not at all to repent of what he
had done, and gave me Reason to fear,
he would soon make a second Attempt of
the like horrible kind. 
‘When I had finished my Discourse, instead
of endeavouring to answer my Arguments,
he looked me stedfastly in the
Face, and with a Smile said, “You are
strangely altered, my good Friend, since
I remember you. I question whether any
of our Bishops could make a better Argument
against Suicide than you have entertained
me with, but unless you can
find Somebody who will lend me a cool
Hundred, I must either hang, or drown,
or starve; and in my Opinion the last
Death is the most terrible of the three.” 
‘I answered him very gravely, that I
was indeed altered since I had seen him
last. That I had found Leisure to look
into my Follies, and to repent of them. I
then advised him to pursue the same Steps; 
and at last concluded with an Assurance,
that I myself would lend him a hundred
Pound, if it would be of any Service to his
Affairs, and he would not put it into the
Power of a Die to deprive him of it. 
‘Mr. Watson, who seemed almost composed
in Slumber by the former Part of my 

Discourse, was roused by the latter. He
seized my Hand eagerly, gave me a thousand
Thanks, and declared I was a Friend
indeed; adding, that he hoped I had a
better Opinion of him, than to imagine he
had profited so little by Experience, as to
put any Confidence in those damned Dice,
which had so often deceived him. “No
no,” cries he, “let me but once handsomely
be set up again, and if ever Fortune
makes a broken Merchant of me
afterwards, I will forgive her.” 
‘I very well understood the Language
of setting up, and broken Merchant. I
therefore said to him with a very grave
Face, Mr. Watson, you must endeavour
to find out some Business, or
Employment, by which you may procure
yourself a Livelihood; and I promise
you, could I see any Probability of
being repaid hereafter, I would advance
a much larger Sum than what you have
mentioned, to equip you in any fair and
honourable Calling; but as to Gaming,
besides the Baseness and Wickedness of
making it a Profession, you are really, to
my own Knowledge, unfit for it, and it
will end in your certain Ruin. 
“Why now, that's strange,” answered
he, “neither you, nor any of my Friends,
would ever allow me to know any Thing 

of the Matter, and yet, I believe I am
as good a Hand at every Game as any
of you all; and I heartily wish I was to
play with you only for your whole Fortune; 
I should desire no better Sport,
and I would let you name your Game
into the Bargain; but come, my dear
Boy, have you the Hundred in your
Pocket?” 
‘I answered, I had only a Bill for 50l.
which I delivered him, and promised to
bring him the rest next Morning; 
and after giving him a little more Advice,
took my Leave. 
‘I was indeed better than my Word: 
For I returned to him that very Afternoon. 
When I entered the Room, I
found him sitting up in his Bed at
Cards with a notorious Gamester. This
Sight, you will imagine, shocked me not
a little; to which I may add the Mortification
of seeing my Bill delivered by
him to his Antagonist, and thirty Guienas
only given in Exchange for it. 
‘The other Gamester presently quitted
the Room, and then Watson declared he
was ashamed to see me; “but, says he, I
find Luck runs so damnably against me,
that I will resolve to leave off Play for
ever. I have thought of the kind Proposal
you made me ever since, and I promise 

you there shall be no Fault in me,
if I do not put it in Execution.” 
‘Though I had no great Faith in his
Promises, I produced him the Remainder
of the hundred in Consequence of my
own; for which he gave me a Note,
which was all I ever expected to see
in Return for my Money. 
‘We were prevented from any further
Discourse at present, by the Arrival of the
Apothecary, who with much Joy in his
Countenance, and without even asking his
Patient how he did, proclaimed there
was great News arrived in a Letter to
himself, which he said would shortly be
public, “that the Duke of Monmouth was
landed in the West with a vast Army of
Dutch, and that another vast Fleet hovered
over the Coast of Norfolk, and
was to make a Descent there, in order
to favour the Duke's Enterprize with a
Diversion on that Side.” 
‘This Apothecary was one of the greatest
Politicians of his Time. He was more
delighted with the most paultry Packet,
than with the best Patient; and the highest
Joy he was capable of, he received
from having a Piece of News in his Possession
an Hour or two sooner than any
other Person in the Town. His Advices,
however, were seldom authentic; for 

he would swallow almost any thing as a
Truth, a Humour which many made use
of to impose upon him. 
‘Thus it happened with what he at present
communicated; for it was known
within a short Time afterwards, that the
Duke was really landed; but that his
Army consisted only of a few Attendants; 
and as to the Diversion in Norfolk, it was
entirely false. 
‘The Apothecary staid no longer in the
Room, than while he acquainted us with
his News; and then, without saying a
Syllable to his Patient on any other Subject,
departed to spread his Advices all
over the Town. 
‘Events of this Nature in the Public are
generally apt to eclipse all private Concerns. 
Our Discourse, therefore, now
became entirely political. For my own
Part, I had been for some Time very seriously
affected with the Danger to which
the Protestant Religion was so visibly exposed,
under a Popish Prince; and thought
the Apprehension of it alone sufficient to
justify that Insurrection: For no real Security
can ever be found against the persecuting
Spirit of Popery, when armed
with Power, except the depriving it of
that Power, as woeful Experience presently
shewed. You know how King James 

behaved after getting the better of this
Attempt; how little he valued either his
Royal Word, or Coronation-Oath, or the
Liberties and Rights of his People. But
all had not the Sense to foresee this at first; 
and therefore the Duke of Monmouth was
weakly supported; yet all could feel when
the Evil came upon them; and therefore
all united, at last, to drive out that King,
against whose Exclusion a great Party
among us had so warmly contended, during
the Reign of his Brother, and for whom
they now fought with such Zeal and Affection.’ 
‘What you say,’ interrupted Jones, ‘is
very true; and it has often struck me, as
the most wonderful thing I ever read of in
History, that so soon after this convincing
Experience, which brought our whole Nation
to join so unanimously in expelling
King James, for the Preservation of our
Religion and Liberties, there should be a
Party among us mad enough to desire the
placing his Family again on the Throne.’ 
‘You are not in Earnest!’ answered the
old Man; ‘there can be no such Party. As
bad an Opinion as I have of Mankind, I
cannot believe them infatuated to such a
Degree! There may be some hot-headed
Papists led by their Priests to engage
in this desperate Cause, and think it a 

Holy War; but that Protestants, that
Members of the Church of England should
be such Apostates, such Felos de se, I cannot
believe it; no, no, young Man, unacquainted
as I am with what has past in
the World for these last thirty Years, I
cannot be so imposed upon as to credit so
foolish a Tale: But I see you have a
Mind to sport with my Ignorance.’ ‘Can
it be possible,’ replied Jones, ‘that you
have lived so much out of the World as
not to know, that during that Time there
have been two Rebellions in favour of the
Son of King James, one of which is now
actually raging in the very Heart of this
Kingdom?’ At these Words the old
Gentleman started up, and, in a most solemn
Tone of Voice conjured Jones by his Maker
to tell him, if what he said was really true: 
Which the other as solemnly affirming, he
walked several Turns about the Room, in a
profound Silence, then cried, then laughed,
and, at last, fell down on his Knees, and
blessed God, in a loud Thanksgiving-Prayer,
for having delivered him from all Society
with Human Nature, which could be capable
of such monstrous Extravagances. 
After which being reminded by Jones, that
he had broke off his Story, he resumed it
again, in this Manner. 

‘As Mankind, in the Days I was speaking
of, was not yet arrived to that Pitch
of Madness which I find they are capable
of now, and which, to be sure, I
have only escaped by living alone, and at
a Distance from the Contagion, there was
a considerable Rising in favour of Monmouth,
and my Principles strongly inclining
me to take the same Part, I determined to
join him, and Mr. Watson, from different
Motives concurring in the same Resolution
(for the Spirit of a Gamester will carry
a Man as far upon such an Occasion as the
Spirit of Patriotism,) we soon provided
ourselves with all Necessaries, and went to
the Duke at Bridgwater. The unfortunate
Event of this Enterprize you are, I conclude,
as well acquainted with as myself. 
I escaped, together with Mr. Watson, from
the Battle at Sedgemore, in which Action
I received a slight Wound. We rode
near forty Miles together on the Exeter
Road, and then abandoning our Horses,
scrambled as well as we could through
the Fields and Bye-Roads, till we arrived
at a little wild Hut on a Common, where
a poor old Woman took all the Care of
us she could, and dressed my Wound
with Salve, which quickly healed it.’ 
‘Pray, Sir, where was the Wound,’ 
says Partridge. The Stranger satisfied him 

it was in his Arm, and then continued his
Narrative. ‘Here, Sir,’ said he, ‘Mr.
Watson left me the next Morning, in order,
as he pretended, to get us some
Provision from the Town of Cullumpton; 
but—can I relate it? or can you believe
it? —This Mr. Watson, this Friend,
this base, barbarous, treacherous Villain,
betrayed me to a Party of Horse belonging
to King James, and, at his Return,
delivered me into their Hands. 
‘The Soldiers, being six in Number,
had now seized me, and were conducting
me to Taunton Goal; but neither my present
Situation, nor the Apprehensions of
what might happen to me, were half so
irksome to my Mind, as the Company of
my false Friend, who, having surrendered
himself, was likewise considered as a Prisoner,
tho' he was better treated, as being
to make his Peace at my Expence. 
He at first endeavoured to excuse his
Treachery; but when he received nothing
but Scorn and Upbraiding from me, he
soon changed his Note, abused me as the
most atrocious and malicious Rebel, and
laid all his own Guilt to my Charge, who,
as he declared, had solicited, and even
threatened him, to make him take up Arms
against his gracious, as well as lawful,
Sovereign. 

‘This false Evidence, (for, in Reality,
he had been much the forwarder of the
two) stung me to the Quick, and
raised an Indignation scarce conceivable
by those who have not felt it. However,
Fortune at length, took Pity on me; 
for as we were got a little beyond Wellington,
in a narrow Lane, my Guards received
a false Alarm, that near fifty of the
Enemy were at hand, upon which they
shifted for themselves, and left me and
my Betrayer to do the same. That Villain
immediately ran from me, and I am
glad he did, or I should have certainly
endeavoured, though I had no Arms,
to have executed Vengeance on his Baseness. 
‘I was now once more at Liberty, and
immediately withdrawing from the Highway
into the Fields, I travelled on, scarce
knowing which Way I went, and making
it my chief Care to avoid all public
Roads, and all Towns, nay, even the
most homely Houses; for I imagined
every human Creature whom I saw, desirous
of betraying me. 
‘At last, after rambling several Days
about the Country, during which the
Fields afforded me the same Bed, and the
same Food, which Nature bestows on
our Savage Brothers of the Creation, I 

at length arrived at this Place, where the
Solitude and Wildness of the Country invited
me to fix my Abode. The first
Person with whom I took up my Habitation
was the Mother of this old Woman,
with whom I remained concealed, till the
News of the glorious Revolution put an
End to all my Apprehensions of Danger,
and gave me an Opportunity of once
more visiting my own Home, and of enquiring
a little into my Affairs, which
I soon settled as agreeably to my Brother as
to myself; having resigned every thing
to him, for which he paid me the Sum of
a thousand Pounds, and settled on me
an Annuity for Life. 
‘His Behaviour in this last Instance, as
in all others, was selfish and ungenerous. 
I could not look on him as my Friend,
nor indeed did he desire that I should; so
I presently took my Leave of him, as
well as of my other Acquaintance; and
from that Day to this my History is little
better than a Blank.’ 
‘And is it possible, Sir,’ said Jones,
‘that you can have resided here, from that
Day to this?’ ‘O no, Sir,’ answered
the Gentleman, ‘I have been a great Traveller,
and there are few Parts of Europe
with which I am not acquainted.’ ‘I
have not, Sir,’ cried Jones, ‘the Assurance 

to ask it of you now. Indeed it
would be cruel, after so much Breath as
you have already spent. But you will
give me Leave to wish for some further
Opportunity of hearing the excellent Observations,
which a Man of your Sense
and Knowledge of the World must have
made in so long a Course of Travels.’ 
‘Indeed, young Gentleman,’ answered the
Stranger, ‘I will endeavour to satisfy your
Curiosity on this Head likewise, as far
as I am able.’ Jones attempted fresh
Apologies, but was prevented; and while
he and Partridge sat with greedy and impatient
Ears, the Stranger proceeded as in
the next Chapter. 



A brief History of Europe. And a curious
Discourse between Mr. Jones and the Man
of the Hill. 
In Italy the Landlords are very silent. 
In France they are more talkative, but
yet civil. In Germany and Holland they
are generally very impertinent. And as
for their Honesty, I believe it is pretty
equal in all those Countries. The Laquais
a Louange are sure to lose no Opportunity
of cheating you: And as for the Postilions, 

I think they are pretty much alike
all the World over. These, Sir, are the
Observations on Men which I made in my
Travels, for these were the only Men I
ever conversed with. My Design, when
I went abroad, was to divert myself by
seeing the wondrous Variety of Prospects,
Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Insects, and Vegetables,
with which God has been pleased
to enrich the several Parts of this Globe. 
A Variety, which as it must give great
Pleasure to a contemplative Beholder, so
doth it admirably display the Power and
Wisdom and Goodness of the Creator. 
Indeed, to say the Truth, there is but
one Work in his whole Creation that doth
him any Dishonour, and with that I have
long since avoided holding any Conversation.’ 
‘You will pardon me,’ cries Jones,
‘but I have always imagined, that there is
in this very Work you mention, as great
Variety as in all the rest; for besides the
Difference of Inclination, Customs and
Climates have, I am told, introduced
the utmost Diversity into Human Nature.’ 
‘Very little indeed,’ answered the other; 
‘those who travel in order to acquaint
themselves with the different Manners of
Men, might spare themselves much Pains,
by going to a Carnival at Venice; for there 

they will see at once all which they can
discover in the several Courts of Europe. 
The same Hypocrisy, the same Fraud; 
in short, the same Follies and Vices,
dressed in different Habits. In Spain these
are equipped with much Gravity; and
in Italy, with vast Splendor. In France,
a Knave is dressed like a Fop; and in the
Northern Countries, like a Sloven. But
Human Nature is every where the same,
every where the Object of Detestation and
Scorn. 
‘As for my own Part, I past through
all these Nations, as you perhaps may
have done through a Croud at a Shew,
jostling to get by them, holding my Nose 
with one Hand, and defending my Pockets
with the other, without speaking a
Word to any of them, while I was pressing
on to see what I wanted to see,
which, however entertaining it might be
in itself, scarce made me Amends for the
Trouble the Company gave me.’ 
‘Did not you find some of the Nations
among which you travelled, less troublesome
to you than others? said Jones.’ ‘O
yes,’ replied the old Man, ‘the Turks
were much more tolerable to me than the
Christians. For they are Men of profound
Taciturnity, and never disturb a
Stranger with Questions. Now and then 

indeed they bestow a short Curse upon
him, or spit in his Face as he walks the
Streets, but then they have done with
him, and a Man may live an Age in their
Country without hearing a Dozen Words
from them. But of all the People I ever
saw, Heaven defend me from the French. 
With their damned Prate and Civilities,
and doing the Honour of their Nation to
Strangers, (as they are pleased to call it)
but indeed setting forth their own Vanity; 
they are so troublesome, that I had infinitely
rather pass my Life with the Hottentots,
than set my Foot in Paris again. 
They are a nasty People, but their Nastiness
is mostly without, whereas in France,
and some other Nations that I won't name,
it is all within, and makes them stink
much more to my Reason than that of
Hottentots does to my Nose. 
‘Thus, Sir, I have ended the History
of my Life; for as to all that Series of
Years, during which I have lived retired
here, it affords no Variety to entertain you,
and may be almost considered as one Day. 
The Retirement has been so compleat,
that I could hardly have enjoyed a more
absolute Solitude in the Deserts of the
Thebais, than here in the midst of this
populous Kingdom. As I have no Estate,
I am plagued with no Tenants or 

Stewards; my Annuity is paid me pretty
regularly, as indeed it ought to be, for it is
muchless than what I might have expected,
in Return for what I gave up. Visits I
admit none, and the old Woman who
keeps my House knows, that her Place
entirely depends upon her saving me all
the Trouble of buying the Things that I
want, keeping off all Sollicitation or
Business from me, and holding her
Tongue whenever I am within hearing. 
As my Walks are all by Night, I am
pretty secure in this wild, unfrequented
Place from meeting any Company. Some
few Persons I have met by Chance, and
sent them Home heartily frighted, as
from the Oddness of my Dress and Figure
they took me for a Ghost or a
Hobgoblin. But what has happened to
Night shews, that even here I cannot be
safe from the Villany of Men; for without
your Assistance I had not only been
robbed, but very probably murdered.’ 
Jones thanked the Stranger for the Trouble
he had taken in relating his Story, and
then expressed some Wonder how he could
possibly endure a Life of such Solitude; ‘in
which,’ says he, ‘you may well complain
of the Want of Variety. Indeed I
am astonished how you have filled up, or
rather killed, so much of your Time.’ 

‘I am not at all surprized,’ answered the
other, ‘that to one whose Affections
and Thoughts are fixed on the World,
my Hours should appear to have wanted
Employment in this Place; but there is
one single Act, for which the whole Life
of Man is infinitely too short. What Time
can suffice for the Contemplation and
Worship of that glorious, immortal, and
eternal Being, among the Works of
whose stupendous Creation, not only this
Globe, but even those numberless Luminaries
which we may here behold
spangling all the Sky, tho' they should
many of them be Suns lighting different
Systems of Worlds, may possibly appear
but as a few Atoms, opposed to the
whole Earth which we inhabit? Can a
Man who, by Divine Meditations, is
admitted, as it were, into the Conversation
of this ineffable, incomprehensible
Majesty, think Days, or Years, or Ages,
too long, for the Continuance of so ravishing
an Honour? Shall the trifling Amusements,
the palling Pleasures, the
silly Business of the World, roll away our
Hours too swiftly from us; and shall the
Pace of Time seem sluggish to a Mind
exercised in Studies so high, so important,
and so glorious! As no Time is sufficient,
so no Place is improper 

for this great Concern. On what Object
can we cast our Eyes, which may
not inspire us with Ideas of his Power, of
his Wisdom, and of his Goodness? It
is not necessary, that the rising Sun
should dart his fiery Glories over the
Eastern Horizon; nor that the boisterous
Winds should rush from their Caverns,
and shake the lofty Forest; nor that the
opening Clouds should pour their Deluges
on the Plains: It is not necessary,
I say, that any of these should proclaim
his Majesty; there is not an Insect, not a
Vegetable, of so low an Order in the Creation,
as not to be honoured with bearing
Marks of the Attributes of its great Creator; 
Marks not only of his Power, but
of his Wisdom and Goodness. Man
alone, the King of this Globe, the last
and greatest Work of the Supreme Being,
below the Sun, Man alone hath basely
dishonoured his own Nature, and by
Dishonesty, Cruelty, Ingratitude, and
Treachery, hath called his Maker's
Goodness in Question, by puzzling
us to account how a benevolent Being
should form so foolish, and so vile an
Animal. Yet this is the Being from
whose Conversation you think, I suppose,
that I have been unfortunately restrained,
and without whose blessed Society, Life, in 

your Opinion, must be tedious and insipid.’ 
‘In the former Part of what you said,’ 
replied Jones, ‘I most heartily and readily
concur; but I believe, as well as hope,
that the Abhorrence which you express
for Mankind, in the Conclusion, is much
too general. Indeed you here fall into an
Error, which, in my little Experience, I
have observed to be a very common one,
by taking the Character of Mankind from
the worst and basest among them; whereas
indeed, as an excellent Writer observes,
nothing should be esteemed as characteristical
of a Species, but what is to be
found among the best and most perfect
Individuals of that Species. This Error,
I believe, is generally committed by those
who, from Want of proper Caution in the
Choice of their Friends and Acquaintance,
have suffered Injuries from bad and worthless
Men; two or three Instances of which
are very unjustly charged on all Human
Nature.’ 
‘I think I had Experience enough of
it,’ answered the other. ‘My first Mistress,
and my first Friend, betrayed me in
the basest Manner, and in Matters which
threatened to be of the worst of Consequences,
even to bring me to a shameful
Death.’ 
‘But you will pardon me,’ cries Jones,

‘if I desire you to reflect who that Mistress,
and who that Friend were. What better,
my good Sir, could be expected in Love
derived from the Stews, or in Friendship
first produced and nourished at the
Gaming-Table! To take the Characters
of Women from the former Instance, or
of Men from the latter, would be as unjust
as to assert, that Air is a nauseous and
unwholesome Element, because we find
it so in a Jakes. I have lived but a short
Time in the World, and yet have known
Men worthy of the highest Friendship,
and Women of the highest Love.’ 
‘Alas! young Man,’ answered the Stranger; 
‘you have lived, you confess, but
a very short Time in the World; I was
somewhat older than you when I was of
the same Opinion.’ 
‘You might have remained so still,’ replies
Jones, ‘if you had not been unfortunate,
I will venture to say incautious in
the placing your Affections. If there was
indeed much more Wickedness in the
World than there is, it would not prove
such general Assertions against human Nature,
since much of this arrives by mere
Accident, and many a Man who commits
Evil, is not totally bad and corrupt in
his Heart. In Truth, none seem to have
any Title to assert Human Nature to be
necessarily and universally evil, but those 

whose own Minds afford them one Instance
of this natural Depravity; which is
not, I am convinced, your Case.’ 
‘And such,’ said the Stranger, ‘will be al-always
the most backward to assert any such
thing. Knaves will no more endeavour to
persuade us of the Baseness of Mankind, than
a Highwayman will inform you that there
are Thieves on the Road. This would
indeed be a Method to put you on your
Guard, and to defeat their own Purposes. 
For which Reason tho' Knaves, as I remember,
are very apt to abuse particular
Persons; yet they never cast any Reflection
on Human Nature in general.’ 
The old Gentleman spoke this so warmly,
that as Jones despaired of making a Convert,
and was unwilling to offend, he returned
no Answer. 
The Day now began to send forth its
first Streams of Light, when Jones made
an Apology to the Stranger for his having
staid so long, and perhaps having detained
him from his Rest. The Stranger answered,
‘He never wanted Rest less than
at present; for that Day and Night were
indifferent Seasons to him, and that he
commonly made use of the former for 

the Time of his Repose, and of the latter
for his Walks and Lucubrations. 
However,’ said he, ‘it is now a most
lovely Morning, and if you can bear
any longer to be without your own Rest
or Food, I will gladly entertain you with
the Sight of some very fine Prospects,
which I believe you have not yet seen.’ 
Jones very readily embraced this Offer,
and they immediately set forward together
from the Cottage. As for Partridge, he
had fallen into a profound Repose, just as
the Stranger had finished his Story; for his
Curiosity was satisfied, and the subsequent
Discourse was not forcible enough in its
Operation to conjure down the Charms of
Sleep. Jones therefore left him to enjoy
his Nap; and as the Reader may perhaps
be, at this Season, glad of the same Favour,
we will here put an End to the
Eighth Book of our History. 