


The low and pitiful Behaviour of
Heartfree; and the foolish Conduct
of his Apprentice. 
His Misfortunes did not entirely prevent
Heartfree from closing his
Eyes. On the contrary, he slept
several Hours the first Night of his Confinement. 
However, he perhaps paid too 

severely dear both for his Repose, and
for a sweet Dream which accompanied it,
and represented his little Family in one of
those tender Scenes, which had frequently
past in the Days of his Happiness and Prosperity,
when the Provision they were making
for the future Fortunes of their Children
used to be one of the most agreeable
Topics of Discourse, with which he and
his Wife entertained themselves. The
Pleasantness of this Vision, therefore, served
only, on his awakening, to set forth his
present Misery with additional Horrour,
and to heighten the dreadful Ideas which
now crowded on his Mind. 
He had spent a considerable Time after
his first rising from the Bed on which he
had, without undressing, thrown himself,
and now began to wonder at Mrs. Heartfree's
long Absence; but as Men are
apt (and perhaps wisely too) to draw comfortable
Conclusions from malign Events; 
so he hoped the longer her Stay was, the
more certain was his Deliverance. At length
his Impatience prevailed, and he was just
going to dispatch a Messenger to his own 

House, when his Apprentice came to pay
him a Visit, and, on his Enquiry, informed
him, that his Wife had departed in
Company with Mr. Wild many Hours before,
and had carried all his most valuable
Effects with her; adding at the same time,
that she had acquainted him she had her
Husband's Orders for so doing. 
It is the Observation of many wise Men,
who have studied the Anatomy of the human
Soul with more Attention than our
young Physicians generally bestow on that of
the Body; that great and violent Surprize hath
a different Effect from that which is wrought
in a good Housewife by perceiving any
Disorders in her Kitchen; who, on such
Occasions, commonly spreads the Disorder,
not only over her whole Family, but the
Neighbourhood. Now, these great Calamities,
especially when sudden, tend to
stifle and deaden all the Faculties, instead
of elevating them; and accordingly one
Herodotus tells us a Story of Crœsus, King
of Lydia, who, on beholding his Servants
and Courtiers led captive, wept bitterly; 
but when he saw his Wife and Children 

in that Condition, stood stupid and motionless; 
so stood poor Heartfree on this Relation
of his Apprentice, nothing moving
but his Colour, which entirely forsook his
Countenance. 
The Apprentice, who had not in the
least doubted the Veracity of his Mistress,
perceiving the Surprize which too visibly
appeared in his Master, became speechless
likewise, and both remained silent some
Minutes, gazing with Astonishment and
Horrour at each other. At last Heartfree
cry'd out in an Agony: “My Wife deserted
me in my Misfortunes!” God forbid,
Sir, answered the other. “And what is
become of my poor Children, replied
Heartfree?” They are at home, Sir,
said the Apprentice. “God be praised,
she hath forsaken them too, cries Heartfree: 
Fetch them hither this Instant. 
Go, my dear Jack, bring hither my
little all which remains now: Fly, Child,
if thou dost not intend likewise to forsake
me in my Afflictions.” The Youth
answered he would die sooner than entertain
such a Thought, and, begging his Master 

to be comforted, instantly obeyed his
Orders. 
Heartfree, the Moment the young
Man was departed, threw himself on his
Bed in an Agony of Despair; but, recollecting
himself after he had vented the first
Sallies of his Passion, he began to question
the Infidelity of his Wife, as a Matter impossible. 
He ran over in his Thoughts the
uninterrupted Tenderness which she had
alway shewn him, and, for a Minute, blamed
the Rashness of his Belief against
her; 'till the many Circumstances of her
having left him so long, and neither writ
nor sent to him since her Departure with
all his Effects, and with Wild, of whom
he was not before without Suspicion; and
lastly and chiefly, her false Pretence to his
Commands, entirely turned the Scale, and
convinced him of her Disloyalty. 
While he was in these Agitations of
Mind, the good Apprentice, who had used
the utmost Expedition, brought his Children
to him. He embraced them with the
most passionate Fondness, and imprinted 

numberless Kisses on their little Lips. The
little Girl flew to him with almost as much
Eagerness as he himself exprest at her
Sight, and cry'd out: “O Papa, why did
you not come home to poor Mamma
all this while; I thought you would not
have left your little Nanny so long.” 
After which he asked for her Mother, and
was told she had kiss'd them in the Morning,
and cried very much for his Absence. 
All which brought a Flood of Tears into
the Eyes of this weak, silly Man, who had
not Greatness sufficient to conquer these
low Efforts of Tenderness and Humanity. 
He then proceeded to enquire of the
Maid-servant, who acquainted him, that
she knew no more than that her Mistress
had taken Leave of her Children in the
Morning with many Tears and Kisses, and
had recommended them in the most earnest
manner to her Care; which, she said, she had
promised faithfully to do, and would, while
they were entrusted to her, fulfil. For
which Profession Heartfree expressed much
Gratitude to her; and, after indulging himself
with some little Fondnesses, which we 

shall not relate, he delivered his Children
into the good Woman's Hands, and dismissed
her. 