


The History returns to the Contemplation
of Greatness. 
But we have already perhaps detained
our Reader too long in this Relation,
from the Consideration of our Hero, who
daily gave the most exalted Proofs of
Greatness, in cajoling the Prigs, and
in Exaction on the Debtors; which latter
now grew so GREAT, i. e. corrupted in
their Morals, that they spoke with the utmost 

Contempt of what the Vulgar call
Honesty. The greatest Character among
them was that of a Pick-pocket, or, in
truer Language, a File; and the only Censure
was Want of Dexterity. As to Virtue,
Goodness, and such like, they were the Objects
of Mirth and Derision, and all Newgate
was a complete Collection of Prigs, every
Man being desirous to pick his Neighbour's
Pocket, and every one was as sensible that
his Neighbour was as ready to pick his; so
that (which is almost incredible) as great
Roguery was daily committed within the
Walls of Newgate as without. 
The Glory resulting from these Actions
of Wild, probably animated the Envy of
his Enemies against him. The Day of his
Trial now approached; for which, as Socrates
did, he prepared himself; but not
weakly and foolishly, like that Philosopher,
with Patience and Resignation; but with a
good Number of false Witnesses. However,
as Success is not always proportioned
to the Wisdom of him who endeavours to
attain it; so are we more sorry than ashamed
to relate, that our Hero was, notwithstanding 

his utmost Caution and Prudence,
convicted, and sentenced to a Death; which,
when we consider, not only the great
Men who have suffered it, but the much
larger Number of those, whose highest Honour
it hath been to merit it, we cannot
call otherwise than honourable. Indeed
those, who have unluckily missed it, seem
all their Days to have laboured in vain to
attain an End, which Fortune, for Reasons
only known to herself, hath thought proper
to deny them. Without any farther
Preface then, our Hero was sentenced to be
hanged by the Neck: But whatever was to
be now his Fate, he might console himself
that he had perpetrated what 

—nec Judicis ira, nec ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
For my own Part, I confess, I look on this
Death of Hanging to be as proper for a
Hero as any other; and I solemnly declare,
that, had Alexander the Great been hanged,
it would not in the least have diminished
my Respect to his Memory. Provided 

a Hero in his Life doth but execute a sufficient
Quantity of Mischief; provided he be
but well and heartily cursed by the Widow,
the Orphan, the Poor, and the Oppressed; 
(the sole Rewards, as many Authors
have bitterly lamented both in Prose and
Verse, of Greatness, i. e. Priggism;) I
think it avails little of what Nature his
Death be, whether it be by the Ax, the
Halter, or the Sword. Such Names will
be always sure of living to Posterity, and
of enjoying that Fame, which they so gloriously
and eagerly coveted; for, according
to our GREAT Dramatic Poet: 

—Fame
Not more survives from good than evil Deeds,
Th' aspiring Youth that fir'd th' Ephesian Dome,
Outlives in Fame the pious Fool who rais'd it.
Our Hero now suspected that the Malice
of his Enemies would overpower him. 
He, therefore, betook himself to that true
Support of Greatness in Affliction, a
Bottle; by Means of which he was enabled
to curse, and swear, and bully, and
brave his Fate. Other Comfort indeed he 

had not much; for not a single Friend ever
came near him. His Wife, whose Trial
was deferred to the next Sessions, visited
him but once, when she plagued, tormented,
and upbraided him so cruelly, that he
forbad the Keeper ever to admit her again. 
The Ordinary of Newgate had frequent
Conferences with him, and greatly
would it embellish our History, could we
record all which that good Man delivered
on these Occasions; but unhappily we
could procure only the Substance of a
single Conference, which Mr. Wild committed
to Paper the Moment after it had
past. We shall transcribe it, therefore, exactly
in the same Form and Words we
received it; nor can we help regarding it as
one of the most curious Pieces, which eiter
ancient or modern History hath recorded. 