

As Obadiah loved wind musick preferably
to all the instrumental musick
he carried with him,—he very considerately
set his imagination to work, to
contrive and to invent by what means he
should put himself in a condition of enjoying
it. 
In all distresses (except musical) where
small cords are wanted,—nothing is so
apt to enter a man's head, as his hat-band:
—the philosophy of this is so near the
surface—I scorn to enter into it. 
As Obadiah's was a mix'd case,— 
mark, Sirs,—I say, a mix'd case; for it 

was obstretical,—scrip-tical,—squirtical,
papistical,—and as far as the coach-horse
was concerned in it,—caball-istical—and
only partly musical;—Obadiah made no
scruple of availing himself of the first expedient
which offered;—so taking hold
of the bag and instruments, and griping
them hard together with one hand, and
with the finger and thumb of the other,
putting the end of the hat-band betwixt his
teeth, and then slipping his hand down to
the middle of it,—he tied and cross-tied
them all fast together from one end to
the other (as you would cord a trunk)
with such a multiplicity of round-abouts
and intricate cross turns, with a hard knot
at every intersection or point where the
strings met,—that Dr. Slop must have had
three fifths of Job's patience at least to
have unloosed them. —I think in my conscience,
that had Nature been in one of 

her nimble moods, and in humour for
such a contest—and she and Dr. Slop
both fairly started together—there is no
man living who had seen the bag with all
that Obadiah had done to it,—and known
likewise, the great speed the goddess can
make when she thinks proper, who would
have had the least doubt remaining in his
mind——which of the two would have
carried off the prize. My mother, madam,
had been delivered sooner than the
green bag infallibly—at least by twenty
knots. ——Sport of small accidents, Tristram
Shandy! that thou art, and ever will
be! had that trial been made for thee, and
it was fifty to one but it had,—thy affairs
had not been so depress'd—(at least
by the depression of thy nose) as they have
been; nor had the fortunes of thy house
and the occasions of making them, which
have so often presented themselves in the 

course of thy life, to thee, been so often,
so vexatiously, so tamely, so irrecoverably
abandoned—as thou hast been forced to
leave them!—but 'tis over,—all but the
account of 'em, which cannot be given to
the curious till I am got out into the
world. 