

The good old monk was within
six paces of us, as the idea of
him cross'd my mind; and was advancing
towards us a little out of the
line, as if uncertain whether he should
break in upon us or no. —He stopp'd,
however, as soon as he came up to
us, with a world of frankness; and
having a horn snuff-box in his hand,
he presented it open to me —You
shall taste mine—said I, pulling out
my box (which was a small tortoise
one) and putting it into his hand — 

'Tis most excellent, said the monk; 
Then do me the favour, I replied, to
accept of the box and all, and when
you take a pinch out of it, sometimes
recollect it was the peace-offering of
a man who once used you unkindly,
but not from his heart. 
The poor monk blush'd as red as
scarlet. Mon Dieu! said he, pressing
his hands together—you never
used me unkindly. —I should think,
said the lady, he is not likely. I
blush'd in my turn; but from what
movements, I leave to the few who
feel to analyse —Excuse me, Madame,
replied I —I treated him most unkindly; 
and from no provocations — 
'Tis impossible, said the lady. —My 

God! cried the monk, with a warmth
of asseveration which seemed not to
belong to him—the fault was in me,
and in the indiscretion of my zeal— 
the lady opposed it, and I joined with
her in maintaining it was impossible,
that a spirit so regulated as his, could
give offence to any. 
I knew not that contention could
be rendered so sweet and pleasurable
a thing to the nerves as I then felt it. 
—We remained silent, without any
sensation of that foolish pain which
takes place, when in such a circle you
look for ten minutes in one another's
faces without saying a word. Whilst
this lasted, the monk rubb'd his horn
box upon the sleeve of his tunick; 

and as soon as it had acquired a little
air of brightness by the friction—he
made a low bow, and said, 'twas too
late to say whether it was the weakness
or goodness of our tempers
which had involved us in this contest
—but be it as it would—he begg'd
we might exchange boxes —In saying
this, he presented his to me with
one hand, as he took mine from me
in the other; and having kiss'd it— 
with a stream of good nature in his
eyes he put it into his bosom—and
took his leave. 
I guard this box, as I would the
instrumental parts of my religion, to
help my mind on to something better:
in truth, I seldom go abroad 

without it; and oft and many a time
have I called up by it the courteous
spirit of its owner to regulate my
own, in the justlings of the world; 
they had found full employment for
his, as I learnt from his story, till about
the forty-fifth year of his age, when
upon some military services ill requited,
and meeting at the same time
with a disappointment in the tenderest
of passions, he abandon'd the
sword and the sex together, and took
sanctuary, not so much in his convent
as in himself. 
I feel a damp upon my spirits, as
I am going to add, that in my last
return through Calais, upon inquiring
after Father Lorenzo, I heard 

he had been dead near three months,
and was buried, not in his convent,
but, according to his desire, in a little
cimetiery belonging to it, about two
leagues off: I had a strong desire to
see where they had laid him—when,
upon pulling out his little horn box,
as I sat by his grave, and plucking
up a nettle or two at the head of it,
which had no business to grow there,
they all struck together so forcibly
upon my affections, that I burst into
a flood of tears—but I am as weak as
a woman; and I beg the world not
to smile, but pity me. 